Absent-Mindedness
Mental
-15 points

You have trouble focusing on anything not of immediate interest. You
have -5 on all IQ and IQ-based skill
rolls, save those for the task you are
currently concentrating on. If no
engaging task or topic presents itself,
your attention will drift to more interesting matters in five minutes, and
you will ignore your immediate surroundings until something catches
your attention and brings you back.
Once adrift in your own thoughts, you
must roll against Perception-5 in
order to notice any event short of personal physical injury.
You may attempt to rivet your
attention on a boring topic through
sheer strength of will. To do so, make
a Will-5 roll once every five minutes.
“Boring topics” include small talk,
repetitive manual tasks, guard duty,
driving on an empty highway . . .
Absent-minded individuals also
tend to forget trivial tasks (like paying
the bills) and items (like car keys and
checkbooks). Whenever it becomes
important that you have performed
such a task or brought such an item,
the GM should call for a roll against
IQ-2. On a failure, this detail slipped
your attention.
Example: An absent-minded detective is in a shootout. He was involved
in gunplay earlier in the day, in which
he fired four rounds, so the GM calls
for an IQ-2 roll. The detective fails the
roll, and discovers too late that he forgot to reload his weapon, so his
revolver has only two bullets left!
This is the classic disadvantage for
eccentric geniuses.

Addiction
Mental or Physical
Variable

You are addicted to a drug, which
you must use daily or suffer withdrawal. The value of this disadvantage
depends on the cost, effects, and legality of the drug:

Cost (per day)
Cheap (up to 0.1% of average
starting wealth): -5 points.

Expensive (up to 0.5% of average
starting wealth): -10 points.
Very expensive (more than 0.5% of
average starting wealth): -20 points.

Effects
Incapacitating or hallucinogenic:-10 points.
Highly addictive (-5 on withdrawal
roll): -5 points.
Totally addictive (-10 on withdrawal roll): -10 points.

Legality
Illegal: +0 points.
Legal: +5 points.
Examples: Tobacco is cheap, highly
addictive, and legal; a chain-smoker
has a -5-point Addiction. Heroin is
very expensive, incapacitating, totally
addictive, and illegal; a heroin addict
has a -40-point Addiction.
Non-Chemical Addictions: You can
take Addiction to an activity instead of
a drug – for instance, telepathic contact or spending time in virtual reality.
If this costs money, price the
Addiction based on its daily cost. If it
is free (e.g., telepathic contact), treat it
as “Cheap” if it you can do it almost
anywhere (telepathic contact with
anyone) or as “Expensive” if restrictive
conditions apply (telepathic contact
with one specific person). Such
Addictions almost always cause psychological dependency (see Withdrawal, below).

Effects of Drugs
A stimulating drug leaves you feeling energized . . . until it wears off.
Then you are depressed and irritable.
An incapacitating drug renders you
unconscious (or just blissfully, uselessly drowsy) for about two hours. A hallucinogenic drug renders you useless
for work or combat, though you might
be active and talkative. Some drugs
(e.g., tobacco) have none of these
effects, while others have unique
effects. Side effects are also possible.
For detailed rules, see Addictive Drugs
(p.
440).

Withdrawal
Sometimes, voluntarily or otherwise, you must try to give up your
Addiction. Addiction to a drug that

causes psychological dependency is a
mental disadvantage; withdrawal
from such a drug requires a series of
Will rolls, and may result in mental
problems. Addiction to a drug that
induces physiological dependency is a
physical disadvantage; withdrawal is a
function of your HT, and may cause
physical injury. For details, see Drug
Withdrawal (p.
440). Should you successfully withdraw from an Addiction,
you must immediately buy off this disadvantage.

Minor Addictions
For an Addiction worth only -5
points, the GM may rule that the
expense, stigma, and detrimental
long-term effects of use are the whole
of the disadvantage, and waive the
usual withdrawal rules. This is appropriate for such drugs as tobacco and
caffeine. If forced to go without, you
must make a Will or HT roll as usual,
but the only effects on a failure are
general anxiety, irritability, or restlessness. This manifests as a temporary -1
to DX, IQ, self-control rolls, or reaction rolls (GM’s choice) – not as insanity or injury. Successive failures prolong the duration of the effects; they
do not increase the size of the penalty.
If you can make 14 successful rolls in
succession, you must buy off your
Addiction.
It is also possible to create a 0point Addiction using these rules.
Such Addictions are always Minor
Addictions, and you may take them as-1-point quirks (see Quirks, p. 162).

Alcoholism
Mental
-15 or -20 points

You are an alcohol addict.
Alcoholism uses the Addiction rules
(above). It is cheap, incapacitating,
and usually legal, so it would normally be a -10-point Addiction. But it is
also insidious; therefore, it is worth-15 points – or -20 points if it is illegal.
Most of the time, you may confine
your drinking to the evenings, and
therefore function normally (for game
purposes). However, any time you are
in the presence of alcohol, you must
roll vs. Will to avoid partaking. A failed
roll means you go on a “binge” lasting

2d hours, followed by a hangover; see
Drinking and Intoxication (p.
439).
Alcoholics on a binge are characterized by sudden mood swings – from
extreme friendliness to extreme hostility – and may attack friends, talk too
freely, or make other mistakes.
The other drawback of Alcoholism
is that it is hard to get rid of. Should
you manage to “withdraw,” you no
longer need to drink daily . . . but you
must still make a Will+4 roll whenever
you are in the presence of alcohol. A
failed roll does not reinstate the addiction, but does set off a binge. (Three
binges in a week will reinstate the
addiction.) Thus, there is no normal
way to “buy off” this disadvantage.
Continued Alcoholism will steal
your abilities. You must roll yearly
against HT+2 until you withdraw.
Failure means you lose a level from
one of your four basic attributes – roll
randomly to determine which.

Amnesia
Mental
-10 or -25 points

You’ve lost your memory. You can’t
remember any of your past life,
including your name. This disadvantage comes in two levels:
Partial Amnesia: You, the player,
can see your character sheet, but the
GM may reserve up to -30 points of
your disadvantage allotment for
“secret” disadvantages of his choosing. You know that you can use certain
skills, but have no idea where you
learned them. You are likely to have
enemies – and possibly friends – that
you can’t remember. If you turn yourself in to the police, they can perform
their standard ID checks . . . but you
might turn out to be a wanted criminal. Even if you aren’t, finding out
your name won’t restore your memory! -10 points.
Total Amnesia: The only traits you
can specify during character creation
are those you could see in a mirror.
The GM assigns everything else – and
holds onto your full character sheet
until your memory returns! You have
no idea of your full abilities. Since the
GM knows your quirks and mental
traits, and you don’t, he will sometimes overrule your statements about
what you’re doing. He will also make
all skill rolls for you, because you have
no idea what you can do until you try

it! Your IQ-based skill rolls are at -2
unless the GM feels that memory
would have no effect at all on the task
at hand. -25 points.
You can only buy off Amnesia if
there is some reason why you might
recover your memory; e.g., meeting an
old friend, reliving some fateful event,
or the ever-popular blow to the head.
In most cases, the cure will be related
to the cause of the memory loss.
Particularly twisted GMs might enjoy
making the cause in question some
form of brainwashing. In this case,
one of the hidden disadvantages will
probably be an Enemy with sufficient
resources to have arranged the brainwashing in the first place.


Bad Back
Mental
-15 or -25 points

For whatever reason, your spinal
column is in bad shape. During strenuous physical activity, you may “throw
your back” and suffer crippling pain
or further injury. Whenever you make
a ST roll, and whenever you roll 17 or
18 on an attack or defense roll in
melee combat, or on a roll for an “athletic” skill such as Acrobatics, make a
HT roll as well.
Modifiers: Any modifiers to the success roll for the activity that triggered
the HT roll. For a long task that allows
the luxury of planning, you can try to
minimize the strain on your back; a
successful IQ-2 or Physiology+4 roll
gives +2 on the HT roll.
On a failure, you throw your back.
Consequences depend on the severity
of your case:
Mild: You are at -3 DX until you
rest or someone helps you; a First Aid2 roll will reset your back. You are also
at -3 IQ, but during the next second
only (for your next turn, in combat).
On a critical failure, you are at -5 DX
and must make a Will roll to perform
any physical action. -15 points.
Severe: The HT roll is at -2. On a
failure, DX and IQ are both at -4 until
you receive rest or help; you are in


constant agony. On a critical failure,
you take 1d-3 damage and are at -6 DX
and -4 IQ. -25 points.
High Pain Threshold (p. 59) halves
all DX and IQ penalties (drop fractions), but does not eliminate them
completely.

Bad Grip
Mental
-5 points/level

You have a penalty on tasks that
require a firm grip. Each level (maximum three levels) gives -2 with such
tasks. This penalty is overall – not per
hand. Affected tasks include melee
weapon use, climbing, catching
things, and anything else the GM
deems requires a firm grip (e.g., an
Acrobatics roll to catch a trapeze).
This disadvantage is mutually
exclusive with No Fine Manipulators
(p. 145).

Bad Sight
Mental
-25 points

You have poor vision. This applies
to all your visual senses: regular
vision, Infravision, Ultravision, etc.
You may be nearsighted or farsighted
– your choice.
Nearsighted: You cannot read small
print, computer displays, etc., more
than a foot away, or road signs, etc., at
more than about 10 yards. You are at-6 to Vision rolls to spot items more
than one yard away. When making a
melee attack, you are at -2 to skill.
When making a ranged attack, double
the actual distance to the target when
calculating the range modifier. -25
points.
Farsighted: You cannot read text
except with great difficulty (triple normal time). You are at -6 to Vision rolls
to spot items within one yard, and you
have -3 to DX on any close manual
task, including close combat. -25
points.

Special Limitations
Mitigator: At TL5+, you can acquire
glasses that compensate totally for
Bad Sight while they are worn. At
TL7+, contact lenses are available. In
both cases, remember that accidents
can happen . . . and that enemies can
deprive you of these items. If you are
starting at a tech level in which vision
can be corrected, you must take this
limitation. -60%.

Bad Smell
Mental
-10 points

You exude an appalling odor that
you cannot remove, such as the stench
of death and decay. This causes a -2
reaction from most people and animals (although pests or carrion-eating
scavengers might be unusually attracted to you!). You can mask the smell
with perfumes, but the overpowering
amount needed results in the same
reaction penalty.

Bad Temper
Mental
-10 points

You are not in full control of your
emotions. Make a self-control roll in
any stressful situation. If you fail, you
lose your temper and must insult,
attack, or otherwise act against the
cause of the stress.

Berserk
Mental
-10 points

You tend to rampage out of control
when you or a loved one is harmed,
making frenzied attacks against whoever or whatever you see as the cause
of the trouble. If you also suffer from
Bad Temper (above), any stress may
trigger Berserk.
Make a self-control roll any time
you suffer damage over 1/4 your HP in
the space of one second, and whenever you witness equivalent harm to a
loved one. If you fail, you go berserk.
You go berserk automatically if you
fail a self-control roll for Bad Temper!
You may deliberately go berserk by taking the Concentrate maneuver and
making a successful Will roll. Once
you are berserk, the following rules
apply:
• If armed with a hand weapon,
you must make an All-Out Attack each
turn a foe is in range. If no foe is in
range, you must use a Move maneuver
to get as close as possible to a foe –
and if you can Move and Attack, or
end your Move with a slam, you will.
• If the enemy is more than 20
yards away, you may attack with a
ranged weapon if you have one, but
you may not take the Aim maneuver. If
using a gun, you blaze away at your
maximum rate of fire until your gun is
empty. You cannot reload unless your
weapon – and your Fast-Draw skill –
lets you reload “without thought” (can
take no more than one second). Once
your gun is empty, you must either
draw another gun or charge into
melee combat.
• You are immune to stun and
shock, and your injuries cause no
penalty to your Move score. You make
all rolls to remain conscious or alive at
+4 to HT. If you don’t fail any rolls, you
remain alive and madly attacking
until you reach -5xHP. Then you fall –
dead!
• When you down a foe, you may
(if you wish) attempt another self-control roll to see if you snap out of the
berserk state. If you fail (or do not
roll), you remain berserk and attack
the next foe. Treat any friend who
attempts to restrain you as a foe! You
get to roll again each time you down a
foe, and you get one extra roll when no
more foes remain. If you are still
berserk, you start to attack your
friends . . .
Once you snap out of the berserk
state, all your wounds immediately
affect you. Roll at normal HT to see
whether you remain conscious and
alive.

Special Enhancements
Battle Rage. You go berserk in any
combat situation, regardless of
whether you have been injured. To
avoid this, you must make a self-control roll when you first enter combat
(even a barroom brawl or a boxing
match). +50%.

Bestial
Mental; Exotic
-10 or -15 points

You think and react like a wild animal. You have no concept of “civilized” standards of morality or propriety, and no concept of property. You
fight or flee from those who frighten
or threaten you. You cannot learn
skills that, in the GM’s opinion, rely on
“civilized” notions of art or social
interaction, and you have no default
with such skills.
You are not necessarily out of control; you simply react in an animalistic
manner. You will usually ignore those
who leave you alone (unless they’re
food!), and might even come to display affection for those who treat you
with special kindness. You cannot
understand property in the human
sense, but (depending on your race)
you might understand territory and
avoid doing damage to objects on
another’s territory. Whether you
regard humans as individuals with territory rights is an open question! You
might also understand dominance,
and respect or even obey a human
who has proved to be stronger than
you.
You cannot take an Odious
Personal Habit for your beast-like
behavior; that’s included in the cost of
Bestial. But if your behavior is
extremely repugnant to humans –
equivalent in severity to a -15-point
Odious Personal Habit – the GM
might rule that Bestial is worth -15
points instead of the usual -10. You are
free to take Odious Personal Habits
unrelated to beast-like behavior
(including “eats humans”), however.
Bestial is not necessarily tied to low
IQ, but roleplaying a character who is
both Bestial and remarkably intelligent would be a major challenge
requiring a lot of thought and effort.
The GM may therefore choose to
restrict Bestial to characters with IQ
scores under 10 (or even under 6!), or
simply reserve it for NPCs.
Note that the Wild Animal metatrait (p.
263) includes this disadvantage.

Blindness
Physical
-50 points

You cannot see at all. In unfamiliar
territory, you must travel slowly and
carefully, or have a companion or
guide animal lead you. Many actions
are impossible for you; the GM should
use common sense.
You are at -6 to all combat skills.
You can use hand weapons, but you
cannot target a particular hit location.
If using a ranged weapon, you can
only attack randomly, or engage targets so close that you can hear them.
All this assumes you are accustomed
to blindness. If you suddenly lose your
eyesight, you fight at -10, just as if you
were in total darkness. In either case,
you suffer no extra penalties for operating in the dark.
If you have Blindness, you cannot
purchase superhuman vision abilities.
If you see in a spectrum other than the
visible one, you have the 0-point version of Infravision (p. 60) or
Ultravision (p. 94) – not Blindness and
the 10-point version of one of those
advantages. Note that Scanning Sense

(p. 81) and Vibration Sense (p. 96) are
not vision; you may take either of
these traits in conjunction with
Blindness, at the usual point costs.

Bloodlust
Mental
-10 points

You want to see your foes dead. In
battle, you must go for killing blows,
and put in an extra shot to make sure
of a downed foe. You must make a
self-control roll whenever you need to
accept a surrender, evade a sentry,
take a prisoner, etc. If you fail, you
attempt to kill your foe instead – even
if that means breaking the law, compromising stealth, wasting ammo, or
violating orders. Out of combat, you
never forget that a foe is a foe.
This may seem a truly evil trait, but
many fictional heroes suffer from it.
The hero is not a fiend or sadist; his
animosity is limited to “legitimate”
enemies, be they criminals, enemy soldiers, or feuding clansmen. He often
has a good reason for feeling as he
does. And, in an ordinary tavern
brawl, he would use his fists like anyone else. On the other hand, a gladiator or duelist with Bloodlust would be
very unpopular, a policeman would
soon be up on charges, and a soldier
would risk a court-martial.

Bully
Mental
-10 points

You like to push people around
whenever you can get away with it.
Depending on your personality and
position, this might take the form of
physical attacks, intellectual harassment, or social “cutting.” Make a selfcontrol roll to avoid gross bullying
when you know you shouldn’t – but to
roleplay your character properly, you
should bully anybody you can. Since
nobody likes a bully, others react to
you at -2.

Callous
Mental
-5 points

You are merciless, if not cruel. You
can decipher others’ emotions, but
you do so only to manipulate them –
you don’t care about their feelings or
pain. This gives you -3 on all Teaching
rolls, on Psychology rolls made to help
others (as opposed to deduce weaknesses or conduct scientific research),
and on any skill roll made to interact
with those who have suffered the consequences of your callousness in the
past (GM’s decision). As well, past victims, and anyone with Empathy, will
react to you at -1. But ruthlessness has
its perks: you get an extra +1 to
Interrogation and Intimidation rolls
when you use threats or torture.

Cannot Learn
Mental
-30 points

You cannot spend earned character
points to add or improve DX, IQ,
skills, or mental advantages, nor can
you acquire new techniques (see
Techniques, p.
229) or familiarities
(see Familiarity, p. 169) to accompany
existing skills. You are stuck with your
starting abilities!
You can still increase your ST and
HT, and add physical advantages (with
the GM’s permission). As well, Cannot
Learn doesn’t prevent you from temporarily acquiring skills using the
Modular Abilities advantage (p. 71).
Those with computer brains often
possess both traits.
This trait is most suitable for
golems, mindless undead, robots, and
other automata.

Cannot Speak
Physical
-15 or -25 points

You have a limited capacity for
speech. This trait comes in two levels:
Cannot Speak: You can make vocal
sounds (bark, growl, trill, etc., as
appropriate), but your speech organs
are incapable of the subtle modulations required for language. You may
still have the Mimicry or Voice advantage, or the Disturbing Voice disadvantage (but not Stuttering). Most animals
have this trait. -15 points.

Mute: You cannot vocalize at all. All
communications with others must be
nonverbal: writing, sign language,
Morse code, telepathy, etc. Time spent
communicating this way counts at full
value for study of the related skills (see
Chapter 9). No roll is required (or
allowed!) when you try to communicate with PCs who don’t know your
sign language – roleplay this on your
own! You cannot have any other voicerelated traits. -25 points.

Charitable
Mental
-15 points

You are acutely aware of others’
emotions, and feel compelled to help
those around you – even legitimate
enemies. Make a self-control roll in
any situation where you could render
aid or are specifically asked for help,
but should resist the urge. If you fail,
you must offer assistance, even if that
means violating orders or walking into
a potential trap.

Chronic Depression
Mental
-15 points

You’ve lost your will to live. You’d
commit suicide, but it seems like so
much trouble. Make a self-control roll
to do anything but acquire and consume the minimum necessities for
survival (for instance, to motivate
yourself to go to a movie, attend a job
interview, or keep a date), or whenever you must choose between two or
more actions. If you fail, you take the
path of least resistance. This usually
means staying put and doing nothing.
If your self-control number is sufficiently low, you will find it almost
impossible to do anything at all for
yourself, unless someone physically
drags you out of your lair. If somebody
shows up and demands that you go
out and do something with him, make
a self-control roll. If you fail, you go
along with his plan out of apathy.
You may eventually replace this
disadvantage with another one of
equivalent value that is more conducive to self-esteem. The GM need
only allow this evolution if you roleplay it convincingly. The GM may also
require you to roleplay both disadvantages (the new one constantly, the
Chronic Depression whenever the GM
decides to bring it into play) during
the transition period.
You may also acquire this disadvantage in play. If you violate a selfimposed mental disadvantage (see
p. 121), or lose a Dependent, the GM
may replace that disadvantage with
this one.

Chronic Pain
Mental
Variable

You have an injury, disorder, or illness that leaves you in severe pain on
a regular basis – perhaps even constantly. Examples include arthritis,
bone cancer, migraines, and pieces of
shrapnel embedded in the body (an
“old war wound”).
Roll against the frequency of
appearance for your Chronic Pain
once per day. If you roll below this
number, you suffer a bout of pain. The
timing of this attack is up to the GM,
but it usually occurs during waking
hours – you might wake up with it, or
it might be set off by stress (fatigue,
exertion, etc.) during the day.
While in pain, reduce your DX and
IQ by the amount specified for the
severity of your pain (see below).
Reduce self-control rolls to resist disadvantages such as Bad Temper and
Berserk by the same amount – someone in pain is more likely to lose his
cool. If the GM rules that the attack
occurs while you are trying to sleep,
you suffer penalties for sleep deprivation instead of the usual effects of this
disadvantage.
Chronic Pain attacks endure for a
fixed “interval,” after which you may
attempt a HT roll to recover. If you
succeed, you have dealt with your pain
. . . today. If you fail, the attack continues for another interval, after which
you may attempt another HT roll. And
so on.

Attack occurs on a roll of 12 or less:
x2.
Attack occurs on a roll of 15 or less:
x3.

Chummy
Mental
-5 or -10 points

You work well with others and seek
out company. This trait comes in two
levels:
Chummy: You react to others at +2
most of the time. When alone, you are
unhappy and distracted, and suffer a-1 penalty to IQ-based skills. -5 points.
Gregarious: You usually react to
others at +4. You are miserable when
alone, and use IQ-based skills at -2 – or
at -1 if in a group of four or less. -10
points.

If your self-control number is sufficiently low,
you will find it almost impossible to do anything
at all for yourself, unless someone physically
drags you out of your lair.

Find the point cost of Chronic Pain
by choosing a severity and then multiplying the given cost to reflect the
interval and frequency of attacks.
Drop all fractions.

Severity
Mild: -2 to DX, IQ, and self-control
rolls: -5 points.
Severe: -4 to DX, IQ, and self-control rolls: -10 points.
Agonizing: -6 to DX, IQ, and selfcontrol rolls: -15 points.

Interval
1 hour: x0.5.
2 hours: x1.
4 hours: x1.5.
8 hours: x2.

Frequency of Appearance
Attack occurs on a roll of 6 or less:
x0.5.
Attack occurs on a roll of 9 or less:
x1.


Clueless
Mental
-10 points

You totally miss the point of any
wit aimed at you, and are oblivious to
attempts to seduce you (+4 to resist
Sex Appeal). The meanings of colloquial expressions escape you.
Sophisticated manners are also
beyond you, giving -4 to Savoir-Faire
skill. You have many minor habits that
annoy others (e.g., leaving the turn
signal on while driving from Chicago
to Albuquerque), and may take one or
two of these as quirks. Most people
will react to you at -2.
Unlike No Sense of Humor
(p. 146), you may make jokes – albeit
lame ones – and you can appreciate
slapstick and written humor. However,
you rarely “get” verbal humor, especially if you are the target (roll vs. IQ-4
roll to realize you’re the butt of the
joke). And unlike Gullibility (p. 137),
you normally realize when someone is
trying to take advantage of you, except
in social situations. You are no more
susceptible to Fast-Talk than normal,
save when someone is trying to convince you that an attractive member of
the appropriate sex is interested in
you . . .
This disadvantage is most appropriate for ivory-tower geniuses, aliens
from Mars, etc.

Code of Honor
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You take pride in a set of principles
that you follow at all times. The
specifics can vary, but they always
involve “honorable” behavior. You will
do nearly anything – perhaps even risk
death – to avoid the label “dishonorable” (whatever that means).
You must do more than pay lip
service to a set of principles to get
points for a Code of Honor. You must
be a true follower of the Code! This is
a disadvantage because it often
requires dangerous – if not reckless –
behavior. Furthermore, you can often
be forced into unfair situations,
because your foes know you are
honorable.
Code of Honor is not the same as
Duty (p. 133) or Sense of Duty
(p. 153). A samurai or British
grenadier marches into battle against
fearful odds out of duty, not for his
personal honor (though of course he
would lose honor by fleeing). The risks
you take for your honor are solely on
your own account.
The point value of a particular
Code of Honor depends on how much
trouble it is liable to get you into and
how arbitrary and irrational its
requirements are. An informal Code
that applies only among your peers is
worth -5 points. A formal Code that
applies only among peers, or an informal one that applies all the time, is
worth -10 points. A formal Code that
applies all the time, or that requires
suicide if broken, is worth -15 points.
The GM has the final say! Some
examples:
Code of Honor (Pirate’s): Always
avenge an insult, regardless of the
danger; your buddy’s foe is your own;
never attack a fellow crewman or
buddy except in a fair, open duel.

Anything else goes. This is also suitable for brigands, bikers, etc. -5 points.
Code of Honor (Professional):
Adhere to the ethics of your profession; always do your job to the best of
your ability; support your guild,
union, or professional association.
This is most suitable for lawyers and
physicians (Hippocratic Oath), but
dedicated tradesmen, merchants, and
so forth may have a similar Code. -5
points.
Code of Honor (Gentleman’s): Never
break your word. Never ignore an
insult to yourself, a lady, or your flag;
insults may only be wiped out by an
apology or a duel (not necessarily to
the death!). Never take advantage of
an opponent in any way; weapons and
circumstances must be equal (except
in open war). This only applies
between gentlemen. A discourtesy
from anyone of Status 0 or less calls
for a whipping, not a duel! -10 points.
Code of Honor (Soldier’s): An officer
should be tough but fair, lead from the
front, and look out for his men; an
enlisted man should look out for his
buddies and take care of his kit. Every
soldier should be willing to fight and
die for the honor of his unit, service,
and country; follow orders; obey the
“rules of war”; treat an honorable
enemy with respect (a dishonorable
enemy deserves a bullet); and wear the
uniform with pride. -10 points.
Code of Honor (Chivalry): As Code
of Honor (Gentleman’s), except that
flags haven’t been invented. Respond
to any insult to your liege-lord or to
your faith. Protect any lady, and anyone weaker than yourself. Accept any
challenge to arms from anyone of
greater or equal rank. Even in open
war, sides and weapons must be equal
if the foe is also noble and chivalrous.-15 points.

Cold-Blooded
Mental; Exotic
-5 or -10 points

Your body temperature fluctuates
with the temperature of the environment. You are less susceptible to damage from high or low body temperature (+2 HT to resist the effects of temperature), and require only 1/3 the
food needed by a warm-blooded being
of equal mass, but you tend to “stiffen
up” in cold weather.
After
10 minutes in cold conditions
(or one hour if you have any level of
Temperature Tolerance), you get -1 to
Basic Speed and DX per 10° below
your “threshold temperature” (see
below). At temperatures below
12°,
you must roll vs. HT or take 1 HP of
damage. Warm clothing gives +2 to
this roll.
You regain lost Basic Speed and
DX at the rate of one point of each per
hour once you return to a warm climate. Double this rate in an exceptionally warm environment.
Point value depends on your
“threshold temperature”:
You “stiffen up” below 50°: -5
points.
You “stiffen up” below 65°: -10
points.

Colorblindness
Mental
-10 points

You cannot see any colors at all
(this is total colorblindness). In any
situation requiring color identification
(e.g., gem buying, livery identification,
or pushing the red button to start the
motor), the GM should give you
appropriate difficulties. Certain skills
are always harder for you. In particular, you are at -1 on most Artist,
Chemistry,
Driving,
Merchant,
Piloting, and Tracking rolls.

Combat Paralysis
Mental
-15 points

You tend to “freeze up” in combat
situations, and receive -2 to all Fright
Checks. This has nothing to do with
Cowardice (p. 129) – you may be
brave, but your body betrays you.
In any situation in which personal
harm seems imminent, make a HT
roll. Do not roll until the instant you
need to fight, run, pull the trigger, or
whatever. Any roll over 13 is a failure,
even if you have HT 14+. On a success,
you can act normally. On a failure, you
are mentally stunned (see Effects of
Stun, p.
420). Make another HT roll
every second, at a cumulative +1 per
turn after the first, to break the freeze.
A quick slap from a friend gives +1 to
your cumulative roll.
Once you unfreeze, you will not
freeze again until the immediate danger is over. Then, in the next dangerous
situation, you may freeze once again.
This trait is the opposite of Combat
Reflexes (p.
43). You cannot have
both.

Compulsive Behavior
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You have a habit – often a vice –
that wastes a good deal of your time or
money. You must indulge at least once
per day, if at all possible, and do so any
time you have the opportunity unless
you can make a self-control roll. You
seek to avoid any situation where you
know you will be unable to indulge for
more than a day. You must make a
self-control roll to enter into such a situation; if you succeed (or are forced
into the situation), you suffer from
Bad Temper (p. 124) the whole time,
with the same self-control roll as your
Compulsive Behavior. It’s bad roleplaying to try to avoid your compulsion regularly!
The point value of this disadvantage depends on how much your habit
costs and how much trouble it is likely to get you into. The GM is the final
judge. Examples include:
Compulsive Carousing: You cannot
resist the urge to party! Once per day,
you must seek out a social gathering
and lounge around – feasting, drinking, singing, and joking – for at least
an hour. If you are not invited, you
crash the party; if there is no party,
you attempt to liven things up. Money
is no object! If you have it, you will
spend it. You try almost any mindaltering substance without a second
thought, never refuse a social drink,
and aren’t particularly picky about
your romantic partners. You get +1 to
reactions from like-minded extroverts,
but -1 or worse from sober-minded citizens – and -4 in puritanical settings.-5 points (-10 points in puritanical
settings).
Compulsive Gambling: You cannot
pass up an opportunity to gamble.
Bets, wagers, games of chance, and
even lotteries hold an uncanny fascination for you. If there is no game of
chance or bet going, you will start one.
You try any gambling game proposed
to you, whether you know it or not.
You do not have to have the Gambling
skill, but if you don’t, you will need a
steady source of wealth! If you are prevented from gambling – for instance,
by traveling with nongamblers – you
will quickly earn a reaction penalty (-1
per -5 points in this disadvantage,
after the self-control multiplier) by
constantly talking about gambling and
attempting to draw others into games
or wagers. -5 points.*

Compulsive Generosity: You are too
open-handed. If a beggar asks for
cash, you give – and where others give
copper, you give silver. You always listen to larger requests for financial aid,
if they are even remotely plausible,
and you must make a self-control roll
whenever you hear a good hard-luck
story (if you are broke when asked,
you apologize profusely). You aren’t a
complete sucker – you just feel guilty
about being better off than others. In a
society with a lot of beggars around,
increase your cost of living:
Self-Control Number   Cost of Living Increase
6                     20%
9                     15%
12                    10%
15                    5%
This may earn you a +1 reaction
bonus from pious folk; if you are poor
yourself, the reaction bonus may be
even higher. This trait is incompatible
with Miserliness. -5 points.*
Compulsive Lying: You lie constantly, for no reason other than the joy of
telling the tale. You delight in inventing stories about your deeds, lineage,
wealth – whatever might impress your
audience. Even when exposed as a liar,
you cling to your stories tenaciously,
calling your accuser a liar and a
scoundrel. Make a self-control roll to
tell the pure, unvarnished truth. If you
fail, you lie – no matter how dire the
consequences. When you roll to tell
the truth to your fellow party members, roll out of sight of the other players. Thus, they can never be sure they
are getting accurate information. -15
points.*
Compulsive Spending: Cash just
runs through your fingers! You enjoy
being seen as a big spender, are too
fond of luxury, or find the experience
of buying to be fun – perhaps all three.
Make a self-control roll whenever
someone offers you a purchase that
matches any of your quirks or interests, and the cash in your pocket is
more than twice the asking price. If
you fail, you buy. This raises your cost
of living, and gives you a penalty to
Merchant skill when you bargain or
haggle:
Self-Control Number    Cost of Living Increase   Merchant Skill Penalty
6                      80%                       -4
9                      40%                       -3
12                     20%                       -2
15                     10%                       -1

Compulsive Spending is not limited to the wealthy! A poor farmer can
be a spendthrift. This trait is incompatible with Miserliness (it’s the opposite!), but you can combine it with
Greed. -5 points.*
Compulsive Vowing: You never simply decide to do something; you must
make it an oath. Although these vows
are often trivial in nature, you
approach them all with the same
solemnity and dedication. You may
tack extraneous vows onto legitimate
ones. -5 points.*

Confused
Mental
-10 points

To you, the world seems a strange
and incomprehensible place most of
the time. You are not necessarily stupid, but you are slow to pick up on
new facts or situations.
In particular, you respond poorly to
excessive stimulation. When alone in
the peace and quiet of your own
home, you function normally. But in a
strange place, or when there’s a commotion going on, you must make a
self-control roll. On a failure, you
freeze up instead of taking decisive or
appropriate action. This often prevents you from making Tactics rolls
and engaging in other sorts of longrange planning. The GM should adjust
the self-control roll in accordance
with the stimuli in the area. To resist
confusion from two friends chatting
quietly in a familiar room would
require an unmodified roll, but a
nightclub with flashing lights and
pounding music might give -5, and a
full-scale riot or battle would give -10!
If this disadvantage strikes in combat, you must take the Do Nothing
maneuver each turn. You are not
stunned, and if you are directly and
physically attacked, you can defend
yourself normally. You can even
launch a counterattack against that
one foe. But you never act – only react.

Cowardice
Mental
-10 points

You are extremely careful about
your physical well-being. Make a selfcontrol roll any time you are called on
to risk physical danger. Roll at -5 if you
must risk death. If you fail, you must
refuse to endanger yourself unless
threatened with greater danger!
Cowardice gives a penalty to Fright
Checks whenever physical danger is
involved:
Self-Control Number   Fright Check Penalty
6                     -4
9                     -3
12                    -2
15                    -1

In some times and places, soldiers,
police, etc., react to you at a similar
penalty if they know you are a coward.

Curious
Mental
-5 points

You are naturally very inquisitive.
This is not the curiosity that affects all
PCs (“What’s in that cave? Where did
the flying saucer come from?”), but
the real thing (“What happens if I push
this button?”).
Make a self-control roll when presented with an interesting item or
situation. If you fail, you examine it –
push buttons, pull levers, open doors,
unwrap presents, etc. – even if you
know it could be dangerous. Good
roleplayers won’t try to make this roll
very often . . .
In general, you do everything in
your power to investigate any situation with which you aren’t 100%
familiar. When faced with a real mystery, you simply cannot turn your back
on it. You try to rationalize your
curiosity to others who try to talk you
out of it. Common Sense doesn’t help
– you know you are taking a risk, but
you’re curious anyway!

Cursed
Mental; Supernatural
-75 points

Like Unluckiness (p. 160), but
worse. When anything goes wrong for
your party, it happens to you, first and
worst. If something goes right, it misses you. Any time the GM feels like hosing you, he can, and you have no complaint coming, because you are
Cursed. You can’t buy this off just by
spending points – you must determine
what has cursed you and deal with it,
and then spend the points.

Deafness
Physical
-20 points

You cannot hear anything. You
must receive information in writing (if
you are literate) or sign language.
However, time you spend communicating this way counts at full value for
study of the skills used (Gesture, Lip Reading, etc.); see Chapter 9.


Decreased Time Rate
Mental; Exotic
-100 points

This is the disadvantageous counterpart to Altered Time Rate (p. 38).
You experience time half as fast as
normal: one subjective second for
every two real seconds that pass. You
only get a turn every two seconds in
combat! (Gaming groups that enjoy
extra detail might wish to give characters with Decreased Time Rate “halfturns” instead: splitting a Move
maneuver across two turns, declaring
an Attack maneuver one turn and
rolling to hit the next, etc.)

Delusions
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You believe something that simply
is not true. This may cause others to
consider you insane. And they may be
right! If you suffer from a Delusion,
you must roleplay your belief at all
times. The point value of the Delusion
depends on its nature:
Minor: This Delusion affects your
behavior, and anyone around you will
soon notice it, but it does not keep you
from functioning more-or-less normally. Those who notice your
Delusion will react at -1. Examples:
“Squirrels are messengers from God.”
“The Illuminati are watching me constantly – but only to protect me.” “I am
the rightful Duke of Fnordia, stolen at
birth by Gypsies and doomed to live
among commoners.” -5 points.
Major: This Delusion strongly
affects your behavior, but does not
keep you from living a fairly normal
life. Others will react at -2. Examples:
“The government has all phones
tapped.” “I have Eidetic Memory and
Absolute Direction.” -10 points.

A GM who wants to shake up his players can
have a Delusion turn out to be true. (And
remember: the GM won’t tell you that you are
not really crazy. You can be right and still be
crazy . . .)
Severe: This Delusion affects your
behavior so much that it may keep
you from functioning in the everyday
world. Others react to you at -3, but
they are more likely to fear or pity you
than to attack. A Delusion this severe
can keep you from participating
meaningfully in the campaign; therefore, you should always clear it with
the GM first. Examples: “I am
Napoleon.” “I am immortal.” “Ice
cream makes machines work better,
especially computers. Spoon it right
in.” -15 points.
Depending on your behavior, the
same Delusion could be a quirk (-1
point) or worth -5, -10, or -15 points.
Consider “Everything colored purple
is alive.” If you pat purple things and
say hello, that’s a quirk. If you won’t
discuss serious matters with purple
things in the room, it’s a Minor
Delusion. If you picket the Capitol
demanding Civil Rights For Purple
Things, that’s Major. If you
attack purple things on sight, that’s
Severe!
Regardless of how insane you really are, you may not get more than -40
points, total, from Delusions.
A GM who wants to shake up his
players can have a Delusion turn out
to be true. This does not suit all
Delusions. Of those listed above, for
instance, the ones about squirrels, ice
cream, and Napoleon seem unlikely.
But the Illuminati might really exist,
or Gypsies might really have stolen the
heir to the throne of Fnordia . . . Have
fun!
If your Delusion turns out to be
true, you don’t have to buy it off until
the other players realize it’s true. (And
remember: the GM won’t tell you that
you are not really crazy. You can be
right and still be crazy . . .)



Dependency
Physical; Exotic
Variable

You must regularly ingest a substance (e.g., a drug or magic potion),
touch or carry an object (e.g., a holy
shrine or magical amulet), or spend
time in an environment (e.g., your coffin or your home country, planet, or
plane) in order to survive. If you fail to
do so, you start to lose HP and will
eventually die. Point value depends on
the rarity of the item you depend on:
Rare (cannot be bought; must be
found or made): -30 points.
Occasional (very expensive or hard
to find): -20 points.
Common (expensive, somewhat
hard to find): -10 points.

Very Common (available almost
anywhere): -5 points.
Add -5 points to these values for
items that are illegal in your game
world.
Apply a multiplier based on the frequency with which you must receive
the item:
Constantly: You must carry and use
the substance at all times – for example, an exotic atmosphere. Lose 1 HP
per minute without the substance. x5.
Hourly: Lose 1 HP per 10 minutes
after missing an hourly dose. x4.
Daily: Lose 1 HP per hour after
missing a daily dose. x3.
Weekly: Lose 1 HP per six hours
after missing a weekly dose. x2.
Monthly: Lose 1 HP per day after
missing a monthly dose. x1.
Seasonally: Lose 1 HP per three
days after missing a seasonal dose (a
“season” is three months for this purpose). x1/3 (drop all fractions).
Yearly: Lose 1 HP per two weeks
after missing a yearly dose. x1/10
(drop all fractions).
If you need to touch an object or
spend time in an environment, you
must do so for time equal to your
damage interval in order to avoid
damage. For instance, to avoid losing
1 HP per hour to a daily Dependency
on rest in your coffin, you must spend
at least one hour per day in your coffin. To avoid losing 1 HP every two
weeks to a yearly Dependency on visiting your home planet, you must visit
your home planet for at least two
weeks per year.
With the GM’s permission, normal
humans may take this disadvantage to
represent the special requirements of
certain chronic illnesses.
Not every life-support requirement
qualifies as Dependency. Use
Maintenance (p. 143) if you require
skilled care – not a substance, object,
or environment – to avoid HT loss (not
injury). Use Restricted Diet (p. 151)
for special dietary requirements that
result in slow starvation as opposed to
rapid HP loss when you are forced to
do without.

Special Enhancements
Aging: You age unnaturally without
the item you depend on. For each HP
lost, you also age two years (even if
you are normally Unaging). +30%.

Dependents
Social
Variable

A “Dependent” is an NPC for whom
you are responsible; e.g., your child,
kid brother, or spouse. You must take
care
of
your
Dependents.
Furthermore, your foes can strike at
you through them. (If you have both
an Enemy and a Dependent, and the
dice indicate that both appear, then
the GM can build an entire adventure
around this theme!)
If your Dependent ends up kidnapped or otherwise in danger during
play, you must go to the rescue as soon
as possible. If you don’t go to his aid
immediately, the GM can deny you
bonus character points for “acting out
of character.” Furthermore, you never
earn any character points for a game
session in which your Dependent is
killed or badly hurt.
Three factors determine the disadvantage value of a Dependent: his
competence, his importance (to you!),
and his frequency of appearance.

Competence
Specify the number of points your
Dependent is built on. The more points
you use to “build” your Dependent, the
more competent he will be, and the
fewer points he will be worth as a disadvantage. “Point Total” is the
Dependent’s point total as a fraction of
the PC’s, except for the last line, which
is absolute; “Cost” is the number of
character points the disadvantage is
worth.

Point Total         Cost
No more than 100%   -1
No more than 75%    -2
No more than 50%    -5
No more than 25%    -10
0 or fewer points   -15

The same person can be both a
Dependent and an Ally (p.
36)! Add the
cost of Ally and Dependent together,
and treat the combination as a single
trait: an advantage if the total point
cost is positive, a disadvantage if it is
negative. You must use the same point
total for him in both cases, but frequency of appearance can differ. Roll
separately for his appearance as a
Dependent and as an Ally. If he
appears as a Dependent, he shows up
in a way that causes you trouble (e.g.,
he’s captured). If he appears as an Ally,
he manages to be helpful and take
care of himself. If he appears as both,
he is helpful and troublesome at the
same time; for instance, he uses his
skills to assist you, but also wanders
off, is singled out by the enemy, or otherwise causes problems equal to the
assistance he offers.

Importance
The more important your
Dependent is to you, the more you
multiply his intrinsic “nuisance value”
and worth in points.
Employer or acquaintance: You feel
a responsibility toward this person,
but you may weigh risks to him in a
rational fashion. x1/2.
Friend: You must always try to protect this person. You may only risk
harm to him if something very important (such as the safety of many other
people) is at stake. x1.
Loved one: The Dependent is a relative or a lover. You may not put anything before his safety! x2.

Frequency of Appearance
Choose a frequency of appearance,
as explained under Frequency of
Appearance (p.
36). This should fit the
“story” behind the Dependent. If the
Dependent were your infant child, for
instance, it would be odd for him to
appear “quite rarely”!

Multiple Dependents
You cannot earn points for more
than two Dependents. However, if you
have a group of Dependents, you may
count the entire group as your two
Dependents. Work out the value of an
average member of the group as a
Dependent, and then claim twice this
point value.
Example: A vigilante who is a
schoolteacher by day could have
“generic dependents”: all pupils. They
are young (-10 points), around “quite
often” (x2), and count as “friends” (x1),
for -20 points each. However, the twoDependent limit lets the hero claim -40
points’ worth of Dependents. (And if
one gets hurt, there are always others.)

Dependents in Play
As you earn points, the GM will
scale your Dependent’s abilities proportionally to keep his point total a
fixed percentage of your own. Thus,
his value as a disadvantage will not

change. Children grow up, adults earn
money, and everyone learns new skills.
Dependents who spend a lot of time
around you might become adventurers in their own right. You are free to
suggest reasonable improvements for
your Dependents, but the GM’s word
is final.
If your Dependent is killed, or so
seriously injured that the GM decides
he is effectively out of the campaign,
you must make up the bonus points
you got for him. You have three
options: buy off the amount by spending earned character points, take a
new disadvantage (e.g., Chronic
Depression, p. 126), or get a new
Dependent. New Dependents are usually inappropriate, but a mental disability brought on by the loss is a good solution. (Ever since the octopus
got Amy, you’ve been afraid of the
ocean . . .)

Examples of Dependents
• For anyone: elderly relatives,
teachers, friends, children, younger
brothers or sisters, lovers, husbands
or wives.
• For crimefighters: young sidekicks, reporters, or wards.
• For wizards: apprentices.
• For ship captains (ocean- or
space-going): ensigns or cabin boys.
• For soldiers: orphans or new
recruits.
• For criminals or mad scientists:
incompetent henchmen.

Destiny
Mental; Supernatural
Variable

A disadvantageous Destiny functions identically to an advantageous
one (see p.
48), save that it always
leads to something bad – but perhaps
not immediately, and not without a
chance to gain honor by dealing with
it well. A fated, tragic death can be an
end worthy of a hero! This kind of
Destiny comes in three levels:
Minor Disadvantage: You are fated
to play a small part in a larger story,
and you will not come off so well. You
are guaranteed at least one tragic
experience or embarrassing failure –
although these things are unlikely to
result in your death except under the
most desperate and heroic of
circumstances. -5 points.

Major Disadvantage: You are fated
to play a key role in a sorry turn of
events. For instance, you might be late
with a message that could save the day
. . . or execute the only competent general in a threatened province, causing
its loss to barbarian invaders. Still,
you will survive. -10 points.
Great Disadvantage: Death stalks
you. Something out there has your
name on it. It knows where you are
and it’s getting closer all the time. You
will either die or be ruined, and your
fall will have terrible repercussions for
others. This kind of Destiny is not suitable for every campaign! The GM does
not have to allow it – and if he does, he
should plan on letting the campaign
take a radical turn, or end, when the
Destiny is fulfilled. -15 points.
You must buy off a disadvantageous Destiny as soon as it is fulfilled.
This is automatic if the outcome strips
you of Allies, Status, Wealth, etc.
worth the same number of points. If
you lack the points to buy off your
Destiny, you gain Unluckiness
(p. 160), regardless of the point value
of the Destiny. It is up to the GM
whether you can buy off the
Unluckiness! Alternatively, the GM
might assign you a new bad Destiny,
Divine Curse (below), or other supernatural disadvantage.

Disciplines of Faith
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You live by a strict set of rules in
order to achieve a greater understanding of your faith. This might be a personal decision or a requirement of
your religion. Such rules are optional
in many faiths, though – indeed, some
religions might forbid them as excesses! Disciplines of Faith are often a prerequisite for abilities that channel
divine power: Power Investiture, True
Faith, etc.
Some examples of Disciplines of
Faith:
Asceticism: You have renounced
the comforts of society to lead a life of
self-denial and self-discipline. This
often involves some sort of isolation in
bleak, austere settings. It might even
involve sporadic bouts of severe selfpunishment to excise the mortal taint
of earthly desire. You must try to transcend all need for worldly possessions,

and in any event cannot have aboveaverage Wealth, or Status beyond that
granted by your Religious Rank (if
any). -15 points.
Monasticism: You lead a life apart
from worldly concerns. You are completely devoted to religious pursuits,
which often involves the denial of ego
and self. You must spend at least 75%
of your time sequestered from the
world, and cannot have above-average
Wealth, or Status beyond that granted
by your Religious Rank (if any). -10
points.
Mysticism: You engage in deep
meditation and trance-like contemplation, with the aim of obtaining a closer union with the divine. You spend
most of your time engaged in these rituals, complete with chanting and any
other necessary trappings. Individuals
other than devout co-religionists will
consider you a bit mad, and will react
at -2. -10 points.
Ritualism: You adhere strictly to
elaborate rituals regarding every
aspect of life – from waking to eating
to bathing to sex. Each ritual has its
proper place, time, words, trappings,
and ceremony. Your fundamental
belief is that, through the perfect performance of these rituals, you bring
each aspect of your life closer to the
divine. -5 points.

Disturbing Voice
Physical
-10 points

Your voice is naturally unpleasant
or obviously artificial. Details can
vary. You might be a robot, or use a
technological aid to mitigate the Mute
disadvantage. Your voice might be
raspy, hollow, or squeaky, or your
speech might be monotonous and
without inflection. The game effects in
all cases are identical to those of
Stuttering (p. 157), although you do
not necessarily stutter.
This trait is the opposite of the
Voice advantage (p. 97); you cannot
have both.

Divine Curse
Mental; Supernatural
Variable

You suffer from a curse placed by a
god or similar supernatural force. The
curse might be on just you, on your
entire family, or even on your nation
or race.

Divine Curse can take any form the
GM desires. It can be a continuing
commandment (e.g., “You may never
sleep at night,” -10 points), a misfortune (e.g., “Every child born to you
will die young,” -5 points), or even a
particularly nasty disadvantage such
as Berserk, Blindness, or Epilepsy (at
the usual cost). What makes it distinct
from other disadvantages is the potential for removal. The curse was given
for a reason, and you can try to uncover this reason and atone in play, thereby lifting the curse.
The GM should judge the point
value of Divine Curse on a case-bycase basis, using existing disadvantages as guidelines: the more encompassing or debilitating the curse, the
higher its value. Curses that result in
standard disadvantages should never
be worth more points than those disadvantages. Price commandments as
if they were Vows. The terms of atonement will often be nearly as bad as the
curse itself, or require great effort to
discover and satisfy. Halve the point
value if this is not the case.

Draining
Physical; Supernatural
Variable

Once per day, at a specific time –
sunrise, noon, sunset, midnight, etc. –
you take
2 HP of damage. You can do
nothing to prevent this, and cannot
heal the damage naturally (even if you
have Regeneration!), technologically,
or supernaturally. The only way to
regain your lost HP is to receive a
daily dose of a particular substance.
Point cost depends on the rarity of this
substance:
Rare (e.g., a special potion): -15
points.
Occasional (e.g., virgin’s blood): -10
points.
Common (e.g., human blood): -5
points.
Add -5 points to these values for
items that are illegal in your game
world.
This is not the same as
Dependency (p. 130). You can have
both!

Dread
Mental; Supernatural
Variable

You suffer from a supernatural
aversion that compels you to keep a

certain, minimum distance from a
particular item or substance. If outside forces bring you and the item you
dread closer together than that, you
must move away as fast as you can, by
the most direct route possible. You
may do nothing else until you are
beyond the range of your Dread. If you
cannot put at least that much distance
between yourself and the object of
your Dread, your Dread will render
you helpless!
You can instantly sense the presence of the dreaded substance as soon
as you enter the forbidden radius. You
do not know exactly where it is, but
you know what direction it lies in and
are compelled to go exactly the other
way.
Base value of Dread is -10 points,
which prohibits you from coming
within one yard of the dreaded substance. A larger radius gives an additional -1 point per yard, to a maximum of -20 points at 11 yards. Find
the final disadvantage value by multiplying the point value for your range
to reflect the rarity of the substance, as
described for Weakness (p. 161).

Special Enhancements
Cannot Be Trapped: You cannot
enter the forbidden zone of your own
volition, but if carried there by an outside force, you no longer feel your
Dread. You can act normally in the
forbidden zone until you leave the
substance’s presence, at which time
the prohibition reactivates. -50%.

Duty
Social
Variable

If your occupation and social situation saddle you with a significant
personal obligation toward others,
and occasionally require you to obey
hazardous orders, you have a “Duty.”
Duty most often accompanies Rank
(p. 39), a Patron (p. 72), or one of the
traits discussed under Privilege (p.
20).
A particularly arduous job might
qualify as a Duty, but most ordinary
jobs would not. A wholly self-imposed
feeling of duty is not a Duty, either
(but it can still be a disadvantage; see
Sense of Duty, p. 153). Finally, you cannot claim points for a Duty toward
Dependents (p. 131); the points you
get for Dependents already reflect your
obligations in this regard.

The GM may restrict the Duties
allowed in a campaign, or even forbid
them entirely, if he feels they would
unduly disrupt the flow of the adventure.
If you have a Duty, the GM rolls at
the beginning of each adventure to see
whether it comes into play. Being
“called to duty” could delay your plans
. . . or be the reason for the adventure!
Alternatively, your master might give
you a secret agenda to pursue, or his
associates might harass you while you
are officially “on leave.” If you try to
avoid your Duty, your GM is within his
rights to penalize you for bad roleplaying.
The basic point cost of a Duty
depends on the frequency with which
comes up in play:
Almost all the time (roll of 15 or
less): -15 points. At this level, the GM
may rule that you are always on duty.
Quite often (roll of 12 or less): -10
points.
Fairly often (roll of 9 or less): -5
points.
Quite rarely (roll of 6 or less): -2
points.
This cost is for an occasionally hazardous Duty imposed through normal
social means. If this does not describe
your Duty, you should modify the cost:
Extremely Hazardous: You are
always at risk of death or serious
injury when your Duty comes up.
There are significant penalties if you
refuse to take these risks: dismissal in
disgrace, imprisonment, perhaps even
death. The GM has the final say as to
whether a given Duty is “extremely
hazardous” in his campaign. -5 points.
Involuntary: Your Duty is enforced
by threats to you or your loved ones,
or is imposed by exotic mind control,
a curse, etc. This is unrelated to how
hazardous the Duty is when you carry
it out – the danger here lies in what
will happen if you don’t carry it out! A
Duty can be Involuntary and either
Extremely
Hazardous
or
Nonhazardous. -5 points.
Nonhazardous: Your Duty never
requires you to risk your life. This
option is mutually exclusive with
Extremely Hazardous. +5 points. (If
this raises the cost of your Duty to 0
points or more, the obligation is too
trivial to qualify as a Duty.)

Examples
Example 1: A mayor is indebted to
the crime lord who got him elected.
His benefactor rarely calls on him for
favors (-2 points), but since the mayor
faces blackmail or violence if he refuses to comply, his Duty is Involuntary.
Duty (Crime Lord, 6 or less;
Involuntary) is worth -7 points.
Example 2: A commando is always
on duty (-15 points). He might see
only a handful of combat assignments
in his whole career, but these will be
deadly. And his daily routine calls for
him to jump out of planes, hike
through snake-infested jungles, and
train with live ammo. A commando
has Duty (Army, 15 or less; Extremely
Hazardous), for -20 points.


Dyslexia
Mental
-10 points

You have a crippling reading disability. Even simple maps and road
signs are beyond you. You start with a
written comprehension level of
“None” in your native language. This
is included in Dyslexia; you get no
extra points for it. Furthermore, you
may never improve your written comprehension level beyond “None” in
any language. For more on language
comprehension, see Language (p.
23).
You can learn “book-learned” skills
at normal speed if you have a teacher
to substitute for your inability to use
texts. Attempts to learn such a skill
without a teacher progress at 1/4
speed – if the skill is one you can teach
yourself without books. The GM’s
word is final in all cases. In traditional fantasy settings, magic is a booklearned skill, and Dyslexia prevents
you from ever becoming a wizard.
Note that this is a severe case. Mild
dyslexia is not significant in game
terms, except possibly as a quirk.

Easy to Kill
Physical
-2 points/level

You have a health problem or structural weakness that leaves you prone
to catastrophic system failure if you
suffer enough damage. Each level of
Easy to Kill gives -1 to HT rolls made
for survival at -HP or below, and on
any HT roll where failure would mean
instant death (e.g., heart failure). This
does not affect most normal HT rolls –
only those to avoid certain death. You
may not reduce your HT roll below
2.
For instance, if you have HT 10, you
are limited to Easy to Kill 7.

Easy to Read
Mental
-10 points

Your body language betrays your
true intentions. This is not the same as
Truthfulness (p. 159). You have no
moral problem with lying, and may
even possess Fast-Talk at a high level,
but your face or stance gives the game
away.
Easy to Read gives others +4 on all
Empathy, Body Language, and
Psychology rolls to discern your
intentions or the truth of your words.
As well, they get +4 to their IQ, Detect
Lies, and Gambling rolls in any Quick
Contest with your Acting, Fast-Talk,
or Gambling skill when you try to lie
or bluff. (If you also have
Truthfulness, your Fast-Talk skill is at-5 on top of this.) This is a crippling
disadvantage for a would-be spy, con
man, or gambler!
This is a mental disadvantage,
despite its physical manifestations;
with enough practice, you can “buy it
off.”

Electrical
Physical; Exotic
-20 points

Your body contains unshielded
electronics, or relies on electrical
power for its vital energy. This makes
you susceptible to attacks that only
affect electrical systems, such as
spells, advantages, and ultra-tech
weapons that drain power or produce
“surge” effects, and the electromagnetic pulse from a nuclear blast. A critical
hit from an electrical attack causes
you to “short-circuit,” rendering you
unconscious in addition to any other
damage effects.
This disadvantage usually accompanies the Machine meta-trait
(p.
263), but this is not required.
Afflictions and Innate Attacks that
only affect those with this trait are
possible. Apply the -20% Accessibility
limitation “Only on Electrical” to all
such attacks.

Enemies
Social
Variable

An “Enemy” is an NPC, group of
NPCs, or organization that actively
works against you, personally, on your
adventures. Some Enemies want to kill
you . . . others have more devious goals.
Determine the nature of your
Enemy when you create your character, and explain to the GM why the
Enemy is after you. The GM is free to
fill in additional details as he sees fit.
Three factors determine the disadvantage value of an Enemy: its power,
its intent, and its frequency of
appearance.

Power
The more powerful the Enemy, the
more points it is worth as a disadvantage. The GM sets this value. Note that
when your Enemy is an organization,
the point value is based on the number of individuals who are after you –
not on the total size of the group!
One person, less powerful than the
PC (built on about 50% of the PC’s
starting points). -5 points.
One person, equal in power to the
PC (built on about 100% of the PC’s
starting points), or a small group of
less-powerful people (3 to 5 people).
Examples: A mad scientist, or the four
brothers of the man you killed in a
duel. -10 points.
One person, more powerful than
the PC (built on at least 150% of the
PC’s starting points), or a mediumsized group of less-powerful people (6
to
20 people). Examples: a single
superhuman or a city police department (which numbers in the hundreds, but they’re not all after you at
once). -20 points.
A large group of less-powerful people (21 to 1,000 people), or a mediumsized group that includes some formidable or superhuman individuals.
Examples: the FBI or the Mafia. -30
points.
An entire government, a whole
guild of powerful wizards, an organization of supers, or some other utterly
formidable group. -40 points.

Special Cases
There are two special cases for
which you should adjust the costs
given above before multiplying for
intent and frequency of appearance:

Evil Twin: Your Enemy looks and
sounds like you, and perhaps even
uses your name, but acts completely
opposite. Often, others will think you
suffer from Split Personality (p. 156),
and react appropriately (-3 to reactions). You might never meet your Evil
Twin, but you will hear about him –
usually when you’re taking the blame
for something you didn’t do. Normally,
an Evil Twin has exactly the same
skills and abilities as you, but his mental disadvantages are opposite or
skewed. This makes him an even
match: a -10-point Enemy. If he is
more capable than you, he is worth
extra points, because he is better
equipped to make you look insane,
and you are less able to predict and
thwart his actions.

Frequency of Appearance
Choose a frequency of appearance,
as explained under Frequency of
Appearance (p.
26). Roll at the beginning of each adventure, or at the start of
each session of a continuing adventure.

Limits on Enemies
You may not take more than two
Enemies, or claim more than -60
points in Enemies. (If the whole U.S.
government is out to get you, the fact
that your old college professor has lost
his mind, and is also after you, pales to
insignificance.)

Intent
The more unpleasant the Enemy’s
intentions, the more you multiply its
worth in points.

Watcher: Your Enemy stalks you or
spies on you. This is annoying, and
makes it hard to keep secrets, but it is
rarely more than a minor inconvenience. Examples: an aggressive journalist dogging a politician, detectives
shadowing a suspected criminal. x1/4.
Rival: Your Enemy wishes to
upstage or inconvenience you, or
plays cruel practical jokes on you (this
is typical of most Evil Twins), but
stops short of anything that would do
lasting harm. Examples: a politician’s
bitter political rival, detectives harassing a suspected criminal. x1/2.
Hunter: The Enemy intends to
arrest, bankrupt, injure, or otherwise
harm you in some lasting way – or
simply wants to kill you. Examples: an
assassin gunning for a politician, detectives out to arrest a suspected
criminal. x1.


Enemies in Play
If the dice indicate that an Enemy
should show up, the GM must decide
how and where the Enemy becomes
involved. If an Enemy is very powerful, or if a number of different Enemies
show up at the same time, this may
influence the whole adventure.
If you take an extremely powerful
Enemy, you are likely to be jailed or
killed before long. So it goes. You can
get a 60-point bonus by taking Enemy
(FBI, 12 or less; Hunter), but your
every adventure will be that of a hunted criminal. Even with an extra 60
points, your career may be short.
If you start with a weak Enemy, or
play cleverly, you might manage to
eliminate your foe or permanently
change his attitude toward you. But as
the saying goes, “There ain’t no such
thing as a free lunch.” If you get rid of
an Enemy, you have three choices:

1. Pay enough character points to
buy off the original bonus you got for
that Enemy.
2. Take a disadvantage to make up
for the point bonus. For instance, you
might have been kicked in the head
during the final battle, leaving you
partially deaf. Or a giant spider might
have attacked you, leaving you with
arachnophobia. The new disadvantage should have the same point cost
as your former Enemy (or less, if you
want to buy off part of the disadvantage). If you cannot think of a good
substitute disadvantage, the GM will
be more than happy to supply one!
3. Take a new Enemy of equal
value. You might have destroyed the
fiendish Dr. Scorpion – but his
brother is continuing his evil work.

Evil Twin is more skilled than you
or possesses abilities that you do not
(GM decides): -5 points.
Evil Twin is more skilled than you
and possesses abilities that you do not
(GM decides): -10 points.
Unknown: You know you have an
Enemy, but you have no idea who it is.
Tell the GM the power level of your
Enemy. He will create the Enemy in
secret and give you no details whatsoever! The advantage of surprise
increases your Enemy’s effective
power level, and hence its disadvantage value. -5 points.


Epilepsy
Physical
-30 points

You suffer from severe epilepsy.
You are subject to seizures during
which your limbs tremble uncontrollably and you cannot speak or think
clearly.
Make a HT roll whenever you are
in a stressful situation (especially if
your life or the life of a friend is threatened). If you have any sort of Phobia,
exposure to the object of your fear
counts as a stressful situation; roll vs.
HT once every 10 minutes. On a failure, you suffer a seizure that lasts 1d
minutes and costs you 1d FP. You can
do nothing during that time.
You may attempt to induce a
seizure through autohypnosis. This
requires one minute of concentration
and a successful Will or Autohypnosis
roll. Seizures near areas charged with
supernatural energies might produce
visions. Whether these are useful is up
to the GM.
Low-tech individuals who do not
understand “fits” may be awed by
them, and perhaps even believe your
seizure represents a communication
from the gods. Make a reaction roll at
+1. A reaction of “Very Good” or better
indicates religious awe! “Poor” or
worse causes the observers to flee –
not to attack (unless they had other
provocation).

Extra Sleep
Physical
-2 points/level

You need more sleep than most
people. A normal human requires 8
hours of sleep per night. Each level
(maximum of four levels) means you
need one additional hour of sleep.
Thus, you must go to bed early or
sleep in for a few hours each day. This
gives you less time each day in which
to study or work on other projects.

Fanaticism
Mental
-15 points

You believe so strongly in a country, organization, philosophy, or religion that you put it ahead of everything else. You might even be willing
to die for it! If the object of your
Fanaticism demands obedience to a
code of behavior or loyalty to a leader,
you oblige willingly and unquestioningly. You must roleplay your
unwavering dedication.

Fanaticism does not make you
mindless or evil. A glaring priest of
Set, brandishing his bloody dagger, is
a fanatic. But so is a kamikaze pilot,
exchanging himself for an aircraft carrier. And so is a patriot who says, “Give
me liberty or give me death!”
Fanaticism is a state of mind; it is
what you are fanatic about that makes
the difference.
Extreme Fanaticism: This is an
advanced case of Fanaticism. You get
+3 on Will rolls to resist
Brainwashing, Interrogation, and
supernatural mind control in any situation where failure to resist would
lead to betrayal of your cult or organization. On the other hand, you will not
hesitate to die for your cause, and will
undertake suicide missions “matterof-factly.” This is still worth -15 points.
Your willingness to die is offset by the
significant bonus to Will (which will
apply a good deal of the time, if you
are roleplaying properly).


Fearfulness
Mental
-2 points/level

You are nervous and timid.
Subtract your Fearfulness from your
Will whenever you make a Fright
Check, and whenever you must resist
the Intimidation skill (p.
202) or a
supernatural power that causes fear.
As well, add your Fearfulness level to
all Intimidation rolls made against
you.
You may not reduce your Will roll
below
2. For instance, if you have Will
11, you are limited to Fearfulness 8.
This trait is the opposite of
Fearlessness (p. 55); you cannot have
both.

Flashbacks
Mental
Variable

You tend to experience “flashbacks” when under stress. These are
vivid hallucinations, full-participation
replays of memories, or similar phenomena. You should choose the type
of flashback you experience when you
take this disadvantage. The content of
each episode is up to the GM.
In any situation that the GM feels
is stressful, he will roll
2d. On a 6 or
less, you have a flashback. The GM
will roll whenever you miss a Fright
Check or make the roll exactly, and
whenever you fail a self-control roll
for another stress-related disadvantage. The flashback occurs in addition
to any other results!
Point value depends on the severity
of the flashback:
Mild: Duration is
2d seconds. The
attendant hallucinations give -2 on all
skill rolls, but they are minor – you
realize that you are experiencing a
flashback. -5 points.
Severe: Duration is 1d minutes. The
hallucinations give -5 on all skill rolls,
and seem real. -10 points.
Crippling: Duration is
2d minutes.
The hallucinations are so severe that
they preclude all skill use. The flashback seems completely, 100% real,
and can be potentially fatal, as you are
receiving no input from the real world.-20 points.

Fragile
Physical; Exotic
Variable

You are susceptible to wounding
effects that do not apply to normal
humans. Attacks do not injure you any
more than usual (that’s Vulnerability,
p. 161), but enough penetrating damage can trigger results more catastrophic than stunning, unconsciousness, or bleeding. Possibilities include:
Brittle: You are brittle (like a creature of ice or crystal) or rotten (like a
decaying undead monster). Whenever
an injury cripples one of your limbs or
extremities, it breaks off. If you can
make a HT roll, it falls off in one piece;
otherwise, it shatters or liquefies
irrecoverably. Furthermore, should
you fail any HT roll to avoid death,
you are instantly destroyed – you shatter, melt, decay to goo, etc., and
instantly go to -10xHP. -15 points.
Combustible: Your body burns
more easily than flesh. Perhaps it is
dry, resinous, or made of wood. Make
a HT roll to avoid catching fire whenever you receive a major wound from a
burning or explosive attack. You catch
fire automatically if such an attack
inflicts 10+ HP of injury. Once aflame,
you suffer 1d-1 injury per second until
you extinguish the fire by immersion
in water, rolling on the ground (takes 2
seconds), etc. -5 points.

Explosive: Your body contains
explosives, compressed gas, or something else unstable. On any critical
failure on the HT roll for a major
wound, you explode! You also explode
if you fail any HT roll to avoid death
by
2+. Treat this as a 6dx(HP/10)
crushing explosion. The blast instantly reduces you to -10xHP, regardless of
the damage it inflicts. -15 points.
Flammable: Your body contains
something highly flammable: gasoline, hydrogen gas, etc. Make a HT roll
to avoid catching fire, with effects as
per Combustible, after a major wound
from any kind of attack. Roll at -3 for
a burning or explosive attack, -3 if the
attack struck the vitals, and -6 if both.
Once you are burning, a critical failure on any HT roll to avoid death
means you explode as described for
Explosive. You may be Combustible as
well. If so, any burning or explosive
attack that inflicts either a major
wound or 10+ HP of injury automatically sets you ablaze. -10 points.
Unnatural: You are summoned,
conjured, or a magical or weird-science “construct” (e.g., demon, golem,
or undead). You automatically fail the
HT roll to stay alive if reduced to -HP
or below, as that much damage severs
your ties with the force that animates
you. -50 points.
It sometimes makes sense to take
more than one of the above (in particular, Explosive and Flammable often
occur together). The GM must personally approve any combination of
Fragile with Injury Tolerance (p. 60),
as these traits are in many ways opposites.

Frightens Animals
Mental; Supernatural
-10 points

Animals react to you with fear and
aggression. Horses do not permit you
to ride them, dogs shy away from you
or attack savagely, and your mere
scent is enough to panic most creatures. You get -4 on all reaction rolls
made by animals. Anyone who sees
how animals react to you – and those
with Animal Empathy – reacts to you
at -1. Note that guards or police with
guard animals, “sniffer” dogs, etc.
decide how to deal with you based on
the animal’s reaction roll, not their
own!

If your disadvantage is due to
lycanthropy, vampirism, or a similar
trait, observers get +1 on all rolls to
deduce your secret!

G-Intolerance
Physical
-10 or -20 points

You function well under a narrow
range of gravities. For a normal
human, the penalties for non-native
gravity accrue in increments of 0.2G;
see Different Gravity (p.
350). An increment of 0.1G is worth -10 points. An
increment of 0.05G is worth -20
points.
This disadvantage is only allowed
in campaigns that feature regular
space travel.

Gluttony
Mental
-5 points

You are overly fond of good food
and drink. Given the chance, you must
always burden yourself with extra provisions. You should never willingly
miss a meal. Make a self-control roll
when presented with a tempting
morsel or good wine that, for some
reason, you should resist. If you fail,
you partake – regardless of the consequences.

Greed
Mental
-15 points

You lust for wealth. Make a selfcontrol roll any time riches are offered
– as payment for fair work, gains from
adventure, spoils of crime, or just bait.
If you fail, you do whatever it takes to
get the payoff. The GM may modify
this roll if the money involved is small
relative to your own wealth. Small
sums do not tempt you much if you
are rich, but if you are poor, you get -5
or more on your self-control roll if a
rich prize is in the offing. If you have
Honesty (p. 138), your self-control roll
is at +5 for a shady deal and +10 for
outright crime. However, it is almost a
foregone conclusion that you will
eventually do something illegal.


Guilt Complex
Mental
-5 points

You feel personally responsible for
those who play a significant role in
your life. This includes adventuring
companions, employers, subordinates, Allies, Dependents, and those
toward whom you have a Duty or a
Sense of Duty. If anything bad happens to someone like this, you will be
wracked by anxiety and guilt – even if
there was nothing you could have
done to avert the disaster.
If the mishap was not your fault,
you will suffer the effects of Chronic
Depression (p. 126) for (15 - Will)
days, minimum one day. Use your Will
as your effective self-control number.
If the mishap was your fault, the
effects of Chronic Depression will last
(20 - Will) days, minimum two days,
and your effective self-control number
is Will-3.
Others may attempt to help you
overcome your feelings of guilt by
making Fast-Talk or Psychology rolls.
The GM is free to modify their rolls,
depending on how convincing they
sounded. Roleplay it!

Gullibility
Mental
-10 points

There’s one born every minute, and
you’re it. You believe everything you
hear. You’ll swallow even the most
ridiculous story, if it’s told with conviction. Make a self-control roll, modified
by the plausibility of the story, whenever you are confronted with a lie – or
an improbable truth, for that matter. If
you fail, you believe what you were
told!
A lie well told, or involving something you have no familiarity with
(“My father is the chief of police in this
town, and he won’t stand for this!”)
gives -6 to the self-control roll. A lie
concerning a topic you are familiar
with (“Didn’t you know they bred
ducks in your village, Torg?”) gives -3.
You believe even a totally outlandish
tale (“Of course the Eskimos are
descended from Spanish conquistadors; everyone knows that!”), if you
fail an unmodified self-control roll.
You also suffer a -3 penalty on any
Merchant skill roll, or in any situation
in which your credulity might be
exploited. You can never learn the
Detect Lies skill.

Ham-Fisted
Physical
-5 or -10 points

You have unusually poor motor
skills. You suffer a penalty to any DXbased roll to do fine work using the
skills listed under High Manual
Dexterity (p. 59), and to Fast-Draw
skill. For -5 points, the penalty is -3;
for -10 points, it is -6. This does not
affect IQ-based tasks or large-scale
DX-based tasks, nor does it modify
combat-related die rolls other than
Fast-Draw.
You are also a messy eater, can’t tie
a necktie properly, and so on. At the
GM’s option, you get -1 per level of this
trait on any Influence or reaction roll
where being tidy or well-groomed
would matter.
This disadvantage is mutually
exclusive with High Manual Dexterity.

Hard of Hearing
Physical
-10 points

You are not deaf, but you have
some hearing loss. You are at -4 on
any Hearing roll, and on any skill roll
where it is important that you understand someone (if you are the one talking, this disadvantage doesn’t affect
you).

Hemophilia
Physical
-30 points

You are a “bleeder.” Even a small
wound will not heal unless well-bandaged – and you may bleed to death.
Any untreated wound bleeds at a rate
equal to its original damage every
minute. For instance, an untreated
2
HP wound bleeds for
2 HP of damage
per minute until stanched.
First Aid is enough to staunch most
wounds, but an impaling wound to
the torso causes slow internal bleeding. It does damage every minute, as
above, until you receive First Aid.
Furthermore, it continues to do damage equal to its original damage once
per day until properly treated. Only a
Surgery roll or supernatural healing
can stop internal bleeding or restore
HP lost to it. If proper treatment is not
available, you will soon die.
If you suffer from this disadvantage, your HT score may not exceed
10.

Hidebound
Mental
-5 points

You find it difficult to come up
with an original thought. You have a-2 penalty on any task that requires
creativity or invention, including most
rolls against Artist skill, all Engineer
rolls for new inventions, and all skill
rolls made to use the Gadgeteer
advantage.

Honesty
Mental
-10 points

You must obey the law, and do
your best to get others to do so as well.

In an area with little or no law, you do
not “go wild” – you act as though the
laws of your own home were in force.
You also assume that others are honest unless you know otherwise (make
an IQ roll to realize someone might be
dishonest if you haven’t seen proof).
This is a disadvantage, because it
often limits your options! Make a selfcontrol roll when faced with the
“need” to break unreasonable laws; if
you fail, you must obey the law, whatever the consequences. If you manage
to resist your urges and break the law,
make a second self-control roll
afterward. If you fail, you must turn
yourself in to the authorities!
You may fight (or even start a fight,
if you do it in a legal way). You may
even kill in a legal duel or in selfdefense – but you may never murder.
You may steal if there is great need, but
only as a last resort, and you must
attempt to pay your victims back later.
If you are jailed for a crime you did not
commit, but treated fairly and assured
of a trial, you will not try to escape.
You always keep your word. (In a
war, you may act “dishonestly” against
the enemy, but you will not be happy
about it!) However, you are allowed to
lie if it does not involve breaking the
law. Truthfulness (p. 159) is a separate
disadvantage.
Honesty has its rewards, of course.
If you stay alive and in one place long
enough for your honesty to become
known, the GM should give you +1 on
any noncombat reaction roll – or +3 if
a question of trust or honor is
involved. This is essentially a free
Reputation (see Reputation, p.
26).

Horizontal
Physical; Exotic
-10 points

You have a horizontal posture, like
a cat. You can stand on your hind legs
for short periods, but find this very
uncomfortable. You can use one hand
(if you have hands) while standing on
your other limbs, or two hands while
sitting on your haunches; in both
cases, your ground Move is 0 while
doing so. You can carry but not use an
object in one hand if moving at half
Move. If you are human-sized, you
take up two hexes on a battle map.
A horizontal build does not let you
put your full weight behind a kick. As
a result, your thrusting damage is at -1
per die when you kick. Ignore this
penalty if you have Claws (p.
42) – that
trait includes the necessary adaptations to strike at full power. The penalty does apply if you have Hooves, however.
Do not take this disadvantage if
you are Aerial or Aquatic (see No Legs,
p. 145). If you are fully adapted to a
three-dimensional environment, body
posture is irrelevant.

Hunchback
Physical
-10 points

You have a spinal deformity that
forces you into a twisted or hunched
position, usually resulting in a noticeable hump or lump on one or both
shoulders. This reduces height by 6”
without changing weight or build.
Normal clothing and armor will fit
badly, giving you -1 to DX; to avoid
this, you must pay an extra 10% for
specially made gear.
Most people find you disturbing to
see and react at -1. This penalty is
cumulative with regular appearance
modifiers (see Physical Appearance,
p. 21), and you may have no better
than Average appearance. Your
appearance is also distinctive, which
gives you -3 to Disguise or Shadowing
skill, and +3 to others’ attempts to
identify or follow you.
Realistic hunchbacks should have
the Bad Back disadvantage (p. 123) as
well, but this is not required.

Impulsiveness
Mental
-10 points

You hate talk and debate. You prefer action! When you are alone, you
act first and think later. In a group,
when your friends want to stop and
discuss something, you should put in
your two cents’ worth quickly – if at all
– and then do something. Roleplay it!
Make a self-control roll whenever it
would be wise to wait and ponder. If
you fail, you must act.

Increased Consumption
Physical
-10 points/level

One “meal” keeps you going for a
much shorter period of time than it
would a normal human. This is suitable for small creatures that must eat
often, or for machines that rapidly
exhaust their fuel or energy supply.
Increased Consumption 1: You
must eat six meals a day. If you have
the Machine meta-trait (p.
263), you
have a
4-hour endurance.
Increased Consumption 2: You
must eat 12 meals a day. If you have
the Machine meta-trait, you have a
2-hour endurance.
Increased Consumption 3: You
must eat
24 meals a day. If you have
the Machine meta-trait, you have a 1-hour endurance.
. . . and so on, doubling consumption and halving endurance for each
additional level. A single level of this
trait is appropriate for normal
humans who have a build of
Overweight or heavier (see Build,
p. 19), or the Gluttony disadvantage
(p. 137).

Increased Life Support
Physical; Exotic
Variable

Your environmental requirements
in a life-support situation are greater
than those of a normal human. Some
examples:
Extreme Heat/Cold: You require a
temperature above
200° or below 0°.-10 points.
Massive: You require more than a
ton of additional weight in order to
survive aboard a spacecraft or a submarine, or in any other setting where
resources and space are limited. If you
can wear an environment suit, this
always weighs at least a ton. -10
points.
Pressurized: You require a separate
pressurized compartment to survive.-10 points.
Radioactive: You are radioactive or
require a radioactive environment. -10
points.
The GM may allow other kinds of
Increased Life Support. These should
worth no more than -10 points apiece
unless they are extremely exotic. Add
together the value of multiple special
requirements, but note that the total
disadvantage value cannot exceed -40
points.
Increased Life Support represents
the logistical inconvenience of special
life-support requirements, while
Dependency (p. 130), Maintenance
(p. 143), and Restricted Diet (p. 151)
all reflect the health effects of doing
without such requirements. The same
requirement can qualify in both categories if it has consequences for both
health and logistics. But note that a
Dependency you can satisfy with a
one-ounce inhaler of a drug does not
let you claim Increased Life Support
for a pressurized cabin full of the stuff!
The GM’s word is final.
With the GM’s permission, normal
humans may take this disadvantage to
represent the special requirements of
certain chronic illnesses.

Incurious
Mental
-5 points

You hardly ever notice things unrelated to the business at hand. Make a
self-control roll when confronted with
something strange. If you fail, you
ignore it! You react at -1 to new things.

Indecisive
Mental
-10 points

You find it difficult to make up
your mind. As long as there is a single
path before you, you are fine, but as
soon as there is a choice, you begin to
dither. Make a self-control roll whenever a choice confronts you, modified
downward by the number of alternatives you can see: -2 if there are two
choices, -3 if there are three, etc. If you
fail, you do nothing. Roll again every
minute (or every second in combat or
a similar high-stress situation) until
you make up your mind, after which
you may act normally until the next
time you face a decision.
If you are Indecisive and Confused
(p. 129), you must roll as described
above to decide on a course of action.
When you finally succeed, you must
make another self-control roll – this
one for Confused – to see whether you
can act on your decision immediately.

Infectious Attack
Physical; Supernatural
-5 points

You have an infectious supernatural condition. This works identically to
the Dominance advantage (p. 50),
except that you do not control those
you infect and cannot add them as
Allies. This is a disadvantage, because
enemies who survive (or don’t survive!) violent encounters with you
become stronger through the “gift” of
supernatural powers, and are completely free to use their new abilities to
seek vengeance for what you have
done to them.
To prevent PCs with this trait from
turning their friends into powerful
monsters for free, the GM should consider making infected PCs pay points
for supernatural racial templates
gained this way. If they cannot afford
such a template, the GM is free to balance its point cost with supernatural
drawbacks such as Cursed, Dread,
Revulsion, and Weakness.

Innumerate
Mental
-5 points

You have little or no grasp of mathematics. You cannot learn – and get no
default with – Computer Programming, Economics, or any of the skills
that benefit from Mathematical
Ability (see Talent, p. 89). You effectively have Incompetence (p. 164) in
those areas. This has many frustrating
side effects: you must use your fingers
to count or perform arithmetic, you
have no idea if the results computed
by calculating machines are correct
(making them basically useless), and
you are easily cheated by dishonest
merchants (-4 to rolls to notice you’ve
been had).
In “innumerate” cultures, including many cultures at TL4 or below,
this disadvantage is widespread, and
the GM should not count it against the
campaign disadvantage limit (if any).
In societies that prize technological or
mercantile ability, Innumerate individuals are liable to have a Social
Stigma as well. This is worth an additional -5 points and gives -1 to reaction
rolls.

Insomniac
Physical
-10 or -15 points

You go through periods where
falling asleep is very difficult. During
such an episode, you must make a HT1 roll once per night. On a success,
you fall asleep easily, ending that
episode of insomnia. On a failure, you
lose two hours of sleep that night (and
suffer all the usual effects; see Missed
Sleep, p.
426) and the episode continues for another night. On a critical
failure, you get no sleep that night.
Point value depends on severity:
Mild: The GM secretly rolls
2d for
the number of days between episodes.-10 points.
Severe: The GM rolls
2d-1 for the
number of days between episodes. -15
points.

Regardless of severity, whenever
you suffer prolonged stress, the GM
can require a HT roll. Failure means
an episode starts immediately.

Invertebrate
Physical; Exotic
-20 points

You have no spine, exoskeleton, or
other natural body support. Use your
full Basic Lift for the purpose of pushing, but only 1/4 your BL to calculate
the weight you can lift, carry, or pull.
This trait has a small side benefit,
however: you can squeeze through
much smaller openings than your size
might suggest!
Note that this trait differs somewhat from the biological term “invertebrate.”

Jealousy
Mental
-10 points

You react poorly toward those who
seem smarter, more attractive, or better off than you! You resist any plan
proposed by a “rival,” and hate it if
someone else is in the limelight.
(Jealousy
goes
well
with
Megalomania.) If an NPC is jealous,
the GM will apply a -2 to -4 reaction
penalty toward the victim(s) of his
jealousy.

Intolerance
Mental
Variable

You dislike and distrust some (or
all) people who are different from you.
You may be prejudiced on the basis of
class, ethnicity, nationality, religion,
sex, or species. Victims of your
Intolerance will react to you at -1 to -5
(GM’s decision). Point value depends
on the scope of your Intolerance.
If you are thoroughly intolerant,
you react at -3 toward anyone not of
your own class, ethnicity, nationality,
religion, or species (pick one). On a
“Good” reaction, you tolerate the person and are as civil as possible (but are
stiff and cold toward him). On a
“Neutral” reaction, you still tolerate
him, but make it plain in words and
deeds that you don’t care to be around
him and consider him inferior or
offensive. On any worse reaction, you
attack or refuse to associate with the
victim. Total Intolerance of this kind is
worth -10 points.
Intolerance directed at only one
specific class, ethnicity, nationality,
religion, sex, or species is worth from-5 points for a commonly encountered
victim to -1 point (a nasty quirk) for a
rare victim.


Killjoy
Physical
-15 points

Your brain’s pleasure center is
burned out or absent. You cannot
appreciate the taste of good food, the
joy of sex, the savage beauty of combat,
and so on. You might not even remember what these pleasures were like! You
can “go through the motions,” but you
have -3 on all Carousing, Connoisseur,
Erotic Art, and Gambling rolls. Others
react to you at -1 to -3 in any situation
where your lack of appreciation
becomes obvious (GM’s decision). A
bad reaction indicates ridicule from
cultured folk, rejection by a lover, etc. –
not violence.
Some ultra-tech societies might
use surgery to inflict this state as a
form of punishment! If so, you won’t
plot your revenge . . . because there
won’t be any pleasure in it.

Kleptomania
Mental
-15 points

You are compelled to steal – not
necessarily things of value, but anything you can get away with. Make a
self-control roll whenever you are presented with a chance to steal, at up to-3 if the item is especially interesting
to you (not necessarily valuable,
unless you are poor or have Greed). If
fail, you must try to steal it. You may
keep or sell stolen items, but you may
not return or discard them.


Lame
Physical
-10 to -30 points

This disadvantage assumes that
you are a member of a race with legs.
If your entire race is legless, see No
Legs (p. 145).

You have some degree of impaired
mobility:
Crippled Legs: You have all of your
legs, but some of them are damaged.
For a human, this means one bad leg.
You are at -3 to use any skill that
requires the use of your legs, including
all Melee Weapon and unarmed combat skills (but not ranged combat
skills). You must reduce your Basic
Move to half your Basic Speed (round
down), but you get full points for this
(see Basic Move, p. 17). -10 points.
Missing Legs: You have lost some,
but not all, of your legs. For a human,
this means you have one leg. You are
at -6 to use any skill that requires the
use of your legs. Using crutches or a
peg leg, you can stand up and walk
slowly. You must reduce Basic Move
to
2, but you get full points for this.
You can still kick, but between the
standard -2 for a kick and the -6 for
this disadvantage, you do so at DX-8!

Without your crutches or peg leg, you
cannot stand, walk, or kick. -20 points.
Legless: You are missing all of your
legs, no matter how many you started
out with. You are at -6 to use any skill
that requires the use of your legs, and
you cannot stand, kick, or walk at all.
You must reduce Basic Move to 0, but
you get full points for this. -30 points.
Paraplegic: You have all of your
legs, but they are paralyzed. The
effects and point value are identical to
Legless. Unlike a Legless character,
you can be struck in the legs for damage. This is balanced by the fact that it
isn’t inconceivable that you could
regain the use of your legs (a Legless
character is out of luck). -30 points.

Technological Assistance
A muscle-powered wheelchair or
wheeled platform has ground Move
equal to 1/4 your ST (round down),
but cannot pass through narrow doorways, negotiate staircases or steep
curbs, enter most vehicles, etc.
If you have advanced prosthetics
that cancel this disadvantage while
worn, apply a Mitigator limitation
(p. 112) to Lame and any reduced
Basic Move. If surgery or ultra-tech
replacement parts eliminate this disadvantage completely, you must pay
back the points you received for Lame
and reduced Basic Move.



Klutz
Mental
-5 or -15 points

You have an uncanny affinity for
gross physical blunders. You do not
necessarily have a low DX (you may
have up to DX 13 and still select this
trait) but you are more awkward than
your DX would suggest. This disadvantage comes in two levels:
Klutz: Make a DX roll to get
through the day without doing a pratfall, dropping books, or knocking over
shelves filled with fragile items. This is
rarely life-threatening, but it is inconvenient and often expensive. The GM
should be creative in inventing minor
torments. You should especially avoid
laboratories, explosives, china shops,
etc. -5 points.
Total Klutz: As above, but in addition, any failure on a DX roll or DXbased skill roll is considered a critical
failure for you! -15 points.
This trait might seem silly, but it
need not be. Most realistic TL7-8
robots have this disadvantage!



Laziness
Mental
-10 points

You are violently averse to labor.
Your chances of getting a raise or promotion in any job are halved. If you
are self-employed, halve your monthly
pay (see Jobs, p. 516). You must avoid
work – especially hard work – at all
costs. Roleplay it!

Lecherousness
Mental
-15 points

You have an unusually strong
desire for romance. Make a self-control roll whenever you have more than
the briefest contact with an appealing
member of the sex you find
attractive – at -5 if this person is
Handsome/Beautiful, or at -10 if Very
Handsome/Very Beautiful. If you fail,
you must make a “pass,” using whatever wiles and skills you can bring to
bear. You must then suffer the consequences of your actions, successful or
not: physical retribution, jail, communicable disease, or (possibly) an adoring new friend.
Unless the object of your affection
is Very Handsome/Very Beautiful, you
need not roll more than once a day to
avoid making a pass. If someone
turns you down very firmly (e.g., a
black eye, or an arrest for sexual
harassment) the GM may give you a
bonus to future self-control rolls
regarding that individual . . .
Note that you are likely to change
your standards of attractiveness if no
truly attractive members of the
appropriate sex are available!

Lifebane
Mental; Supernatural
-10 points

You have a supernatural aura of
death about you. Grass dies in your
footprints and will never grow there
again, larger plants wilt instantly in
your presence, and insects and other
tiny creatures die if they get within a
yard of you. Your aura has no effect on
animals that weigh more than a few
ounces, on very large plants such as
trees (but the leaves closest to you
might die, and a tree you pass daily for
years will eventually be affected), on
ordinary life forms controlled by
supernatural means (e.g., insect
swarms conjured up using magic), or
on supernatural entities of any kind.
Lifebane gives -2 on reaction rolls
made by anyone in a position to notice
it. If it stems from demonic powers,
vampirism, etc., observers get +2 on
all rolls to deduce your secret! This
trait makes it difficult to use stealthor invisibility-related abilities outdoors, too: +2 on rolls to locate you in
most outdoor environments. It has its
side benefits, however. For instance,
you need never buy insect repellent!

Light Sleeper
Physical
-5 points

You do not sleep as soundly or as
easily as most people. Whenever you
must sleep in an uncomfortable place,
or whenever there is more than the
slightest noise, you must make a HT
roll in order to fall asleep. On a failure,
you can try again after one hour, but
you will suffer all the usual effects of
one hour of missed sleep (see Missed
Sleep, p.
426).
You usually wake up if there is
activity going on around you (but you
are stunned unless you have Combat
Reflexes). If you wish to continue
sleeping, you must fail a Sense roll. If
you wake up, you must make HT rolls
to get back to asleep, as above. This
can occasionally be to your advantage,
but the most likely effect is that you
miss sleep whenever inconsiderate
companions trade watches or return
from a night on the town.

Loner
Mental
-5 points

You require a great deal of “personal space.” Make a self-control roll whenever anyone lingers nearby, watches
over your shoulder, etc. If you fail, you
lash out at that person just as if you had
Bad Temper (p. 124). Loner NPCs
always react to others at a penalty.
Self-Control Number   Reaction Penalty
6                     -4
9                     -3
12                    -2
15                    -1

Low Empathy
Mental
-20 points

You cannot understand emotions
at all. This doesn’t prevent you from
having and showing emotions of your
own (unless you have something like
No Sense of Humor) – your problem is
that you don’t really understand them.
As a result, you have difficulty interacting socially.
You may not take the Empathy
advantage, and suffer a -3 penalty on
all skills that rely in whole or in part
on understanding someone’s emotional motivation, including Acting,
Carousing, Criminology, Detect Lies,
Diplomacy, Enthrallment, Fast-Talk,
Interrogation, Leadership, Merchant,
Politics, Psychology, Savoir-Faire, Sex
Appeal, Sociology, and Streetwise. You
can still have these skills – you just
aren’t as good at them as someone
without this disadvantage.
Low Empathy is common in
androids, demons, golems, the
undead, and some aliens. It is also
appropriate for certain humans! This
trait is mutually exclusive with the
somewhat similar disadvantages
Callous (p. 125) and Oblivious
(p. 146), both of which assume some
understanding of emotions, however
flawed.

Low Pain Threshold
Physical
-10 points

You are very sensitive to pain of all
kinds. Double the shock from any
injury; e.g., if you take
2 HP of damage, you are at -4 to DX on your next
turn. You roll at -4 to resist knockdown, stunning, and physical torture.
Whenever you take a wound that does
more than 1 HP of damage, you must
make a Will roll to avoid crying out.
This can give away your presence, and
may earn you a -1 reaction from
“macho” individuals.

Low Self-Image
Mental
-10 points

You lack self-confidence and underrate your abilities to such a degree that
it interferes with your performance.
You are at -3 to all skill rolls whenever
you believe that the odds are against
you or others expect you to fail (GM’s
judgment). For instance, if you’re a
mechanic, you have no penalty to
repair an engine in your shop . . . but
you are at -3 to make the same repairs
on the road, in the rain, with only a
portable tool kit, and an enemy hot on
your trail – on top of the usual modifiers that would apply in that situation!

Lunacy
Mental
-10 points

The moon has a dramatic and
inconvenient effect on your personality. During the full moon, you are
extremely emotional and volatile (-2 to
all Will and self-control rolls), while on
nights of the new moon, you are very
passive (you temporarily suffer from
the Laziness disadvantage, p. 142).
While the moon is waxing, you are
focused and pleasant; while it is waning, you are apathetic and a little
touchy. Roleplay it!

Magic Susceptibility
Mental; Supernatural
-3 points/level

Magic is more likely to affect you.
Add your Magic Susceptibility to the
skill of anyone casting a spell on you,
and subtract it from your roll to resist
any spell that you can resist. For
instance, if you have Magic
Susceptibility
4, wizards have +4 to
cast spells on you and you get -4 to
resist.
Magic Susceptibility only makes
you more vulnerable to spells cast
directly on you. It does not affect
Missile spells, attacks by magic
weapons, or information-gathering
spells that aren’t cast directly on you.
It also has no effect on supernatural
powers other than magic; e.g., divine
miracles, psionics, or the innate powers of spirits. Magic Susceptibility
works normally against Area spells; do
not double its effects as you would
those of Magic Resistance (p. 67).

Magic Susceptibility, and its precise level, can be recognized by any
mage who looks at your aura or by
anyone who casts a spell on you. You
may have no more than five levels of
Magic Susceptibility.
You
can
combine
Magic
Susceptibility with Magery but not
with Magic Resistance.

Maintenance
Physical
Variable

You require skilled attention at regular intervals to avoid HT loss.
Examples include a robot that needs a
mechanic, a chronically ill person who
needs a doctor’s attention, or a god
that requires devout prayer.
Decide on the care you require and
the skill needed to provide it.
Possibilities include electronic maintenance (use Electronics Repair),
mechanical
maintenance
(use
Mechanic), medical care (use
Physician), and physical repairs (use
Carpentry, Electrician, etc.). You may
specify an advantage or disadvantage
instead; e.g., a god might require worshippers with Disciplines of Faith. You
can split Maintenance between multiple skills; for instance, a robot might
require Electronics Repair and
Mechanic.
Those who maintain you must
have access to the appropriate facilities: a mechanic needs tools, worshippers must pray at a temple, etc. No
resources are consumed, however; for
that, take Dependency (p. 130).
Each installment of maintenance
takes one hour. The base point value
depends on the number of people
needed to perform it:
Number of People   Point Value
1                  -10
2                  -20
3-5                -30
6-10               -40
11-20              -50
21-50              -60
51-100             -70

Add another -10 points per full
doubling of the number of people
required; e.g., a god that requires
10,000 worshippers would have a base-130-point disadvantage. Extra manhours of maintenance may substitute
for extra people, if the GM approves.

The frequency with which you
require maintenance modifies this
base cost.

Maintenance Interval       Multiplier
Monthly                    1/5
Bi-weekly                  1/3
Weekly                     1/2
Every other day            3/4
Daily                      1
Twice daily                2
Three to five times daily  3
Constant                   5

If you miss a maintenance period,
your HT attribute drops by 1 and you
must make a HT roll. Failure results in
some additional incapacity of the
GM’s choosing. Critical failure means
a potentially fatal outcome; e.g., a
human might suffer a heart attack, or
a vehicle’s brakes might fail while it is
moving.
To restore lost HT and capabilities
requires suitable intervention and skill
rolls (repairs if you’re a machine, surgery if you’re a living being, etc.). If
you require an unusual form of maintenance, this might call for exotic
measures!

Manic-Depressive
Mental
-20 points

Your moods are on a seesaw. You
bounce back and forth between bubbling enthusiasm and morose withdrawal. At the beginning of each play
session, roll 1d. On 1-3, you are in
your manic phase;
4-6 indicates
depression. Every five hours of game
time thereafter, roll
2d. A 10 or less
indicates that you begin a mood
swing. Over the next hour, you shift
from your current phase to the opposite one. You remain in the new phase
for at least five hours, after which you
must again roll
2d.
In the manic phase, you suffer the
effects of Overconfidence (p. 148) and
Workaholic (p. 162). You are friendly,
outgoing, and excited about whatever
it is you’re doing. In the depressive
phase, you suffer the effects of
Chronic Depression (p. 126). You are
not interested in doing anything but
lying in bed, sitting in a dark room
and moping, etc. Your effective selfcontrol number for these effects is
equal to your Will.

Emergencies can also cause mood
swings; in that case, the switch is
immediate. On a roll of 10 or less on
3d, you change phases. This can be
good (an emergency jars you into
action) or bad (a problem triggers
depression and you become
worthless).

Megalomania
Mental
-10 points

You believe you are a superman,
that you have been chosen for some
great task, or that you are destined to
conquer. You must choose a grand
goal – most often conquest or the
completion of some fantastic task.
You must let nothing stand between
you and this goal.
You may attract followers with
Fanaticism, but nobody else enjoys
hearing you talk about your brilliance
and great plans. Young or naive characters, and fanatics looking for a new
cause, react to you at +2; others will
react at -2.
This is a better disadvantage for
NPCs than it is for PCs.

Miserliness
Mental
-10 points

You are preoccupied with conserving your wealth. You must always
hunt for the best deal possible. Make a
self-control roll any time you are
called on to spend money. If the
expenditure is large, this roll may be at -5 or worse (GM’s decision). If you fail,
you refuse to spend the money. If you
absolutely must spend the money, you
should haggle and complain interminably. Note that you may have both
Greed (p. 137) and Miserliness!

Missing Digit
Physical
-2 or -5 points

You are missing a finger or thumb.
Missing Finger: Gives -1 DX with
that hand (only). -2 points.
Missing Thumb: Gives -5 DX with
that hand (only). -5 points.


Motion Sickness
Mental
-10 points

You are miserable whenever you
are in a moving vehicle, be it an
automobile, train, airplane, balloon,
ship, or spacecraft. You may never
learn any vehicle-operation skill. You
must roll vs. HT as soon as you are
aboard a moving vehicle. On a failure,
you vomit and are at -5 on all DX, IQ,
and skill rolls for the rest of the journey. On a success, you are merely
miserably queasy and at -2 on DX,
IQ, and skill rolls. Roll daily on long
journeys.

Mundane Background
Mental
-10 points

You have a complete lack of experience with the supernatural and the
weird. When you first enter play, you
can only have mundane skills and
equipment. Magic spells, cinematic
skills, etc. are off-limits. So are Hidden
Lore and Occultism! You can have
supernatural advantages, but you can
neither use them nor learn any skills
that would allow you to use them. In
fact, you have no idea that you possess
such talents, save perhaps for the odd
dream now and then. You must buy
off this disadvantage if you wish to use
supernatural advantages actively or
learn any skill related to the supernatural or the weird.
Mundane Background is only
available in settings with supernatural
or weird elements! It is not a valid disadvantage in perfectly mundane game
worlds.


Neurological Disorder
Physical
Variable

You suffer from one of several neurological disorders that cause tremors,
involuntary movements, facial contortions, etc. Point value depends on
severity:
Mild: Your condition is obvious to
anyone who observes you for more
than a few seconds. You are at -2 to
tasks that involve fine manipulation
(see High Manual Dexterity, p. 59), and
such tasks take twice the normal time.
You also have -2 to social skills such as
Acting, Leadership, Performance,
Public Speaking, and Sex Appeal in
any situation where your condition
would be apparent (GM’s decision).-15 points.
Severe: You find it difficult to function in normal society. You are at -4 to
tasks that involve fine manipulation,
and such tasks take four times as long.
Your DX and Basic Move cannot
exceed your racial average (DX 10 and
Move 5 for a human), and might be
lower. You get -4 to social skills whenever your condition becomes apparent. -35 points.
Crippling: You find it almost impossible to function in normal society.
You are at -6 to tasks that involve fine
manipulation, and such tasks take six
times as long. Your DX and Basic
Move cannot exceed 80% of your
racial average (DX 8 and Move
4 for a
human), and might be considerably
lower. You get -6 to social skills most
of the time. -55 points.
Many other symptoms are possible, including gross motor impairment
(buy down DX or Move), involuntary
vocalizations (treat as Noisy, p. 146),
and facial contortions (reduce appearance level; see Physical Appearance,
p.
21). Violent tics and profane involuntary vocalizations might qualify as
Odious Personal Habits (p.
22).

Night Blindness
Physical
-10 points

You have poor night vision. If the
vision or combat penalty for poor lighting is between -1 and -4 for most people, your penalty is the worse of double
the usual penalty or -3. If the usual
penalty is -5 or worse, you function as
though you were completely blind (see
Blindness, p. 124). If you have Acute
Vision (p.
35), it only applies in situations with no darkness penalty.
This trait is mutually exclusive
with both Night Vision (p. 71) and
Dark Vision (p.
47).

Nightmares
Mental
-5 points

You are tormented each night by
horrible nightmares. Sometimes
they’re so harrowing that they affect
your efficiency during waking hours.
Make a self-control roll each morning
upon awakening. If you fail, you suffered nightmares; this costs you 1 FP
that you can only recover through
sleep. On a roll of 17 or 18, you are left
shaking, and are at -1 to all skill and
Perception rolls for the entire day.
These nightmares can be so vivid
that they’re indistinguishable from
reality. The GM might choose to play
them out in the game, starting out like
a normal scenario and steadily becoming more horrible. The victim should
only gradually come to suspect that he
is dreaming. Such dreams can have a
dramatic effect on the dreamer’s waking life, such as temporary Obsessions
or Phobias, or even a psychosomatic
loss of HP or attribute levels.
If other PCs are involved in the
nightmare, they’re completely unaffected by anything that occurs there
(but if the nightmare takes a long time
to play out, the GM might wish to
reward the players with a bonus character point as a token of appreciation
for their time – maybe two points if
they roleplayed the dream-situation
particularly well). It’s the GM’s option
whether to let the other players know
in advance that the scenario is a
dream. Either way can lead to unique
and fascinating roleplaying.

No Depth Perception
Physical
-15 points

You have two eyes, but you lack
effective binocular vision and cannot
visually judge distances. This might be
due to a vision disorder or a quirk of
your racial neurology. The game
effects are identical to One Eye
(p. 147); you may not take both disadvantages.

No Fine Manipulator
Physical; Exotic
-30 or -50 points

Your body lacks hands and possibly limbs. Point value depends on the
extent of your limitation:
No Fine Manipulators: You have no
body part more agile than paws or
hooves. You cannot use your limbs to
make repairs, pick locks, tie knots,
wield weapons, etc., or even to grasp
firmly. You may only select this trait if
you have nothing approaching the
human hand in terms of overall versatility. If you have a beak, tongue, prehensile tail, etc. that is as good as a
hand, you do not have No Fine
Manipulators! -30 points.

No Manipulators: You have no
limbs. The only way for you to
manipulate objects is to push them
around with your body or head. You
can still move, and are capable of
rolling, wriggling, bouncing, etc. at your Basic Move unless you buy it
down to 0. -50 points.
Note that this trait is limited to nonhumans and supers. Either level qualifies you to buy ST and DX with the-40% No Fine Manipulators limitation.


No Legs
Physical; Exotic
Variable

This disadvantage assumes that
your race lacks legs. If your race has
legs, but you are missing yours, see
Lame (p. 141).
You are a member of a legless race.
There are several different forms of
this trait, but in all cases, you cannot
kick, cannot be struck in the legs in
combat, and need not wear leg armor.
The point costs below assume that the
benefit of having no legs for foes to
target in combat balances the drawback of being unable to kick.
Aerial: You cannot move on land,
but you can hover, glide, or fly. You
must purchase the Flight advantage
(p. 56). Calculate Basic Speed as usual
and use twice this value to determine
your basic air Move, as described for
Flight. Your ground Move is 0. 0
points.
Aquatic: You cannot move on land,
but you are adapted to movement on
or in water, like a ship or a fish.
Calculate Basic Move and use this as
your basic water Move. Your ground
Move is 0. You suffer no skill penalties
for working in or under water. 0
points. If your mobility depends on
fins, masts, paddles, or sails that you
can’t armor, or you can’t dive: -5
points. If both: -10 points.

Bounces, Rolls, or Slithers: You
move on land without using legs, like
a snake or a wheel-form robot. Work
out Basic Move and use it as your
ground Move, just as a legged character would. 0 points.

Semi-Aquatic: You “walk” on flippers, like a seal. Use Basic Move as
your basic water Move and 1/5 this as
your ground Move – that is, reverse the
normal relationship between ground
and water Move. You suffer standard
skill penalties in the water. 0 points.
Sessile: Your base is anchored
where you sit, like a tree or a building.
You can’t move under your own power
in any environment, and lack the
option of using a moving platform
(although you can be moved, with
considerable effort). Your Basic Move
is automatically 0, and you get no
extra points for this. You can still have
manipulators. If so, you wield
weapons at no DX penalty, because
unlike those with the Lame disadvantage, you have a very stable base! -50
points.
Tracked or Wheeled: You have
tracks or wheels instead of legs.
Specify how many – one to four, or
any higher even number. If using hit
locations, treat each track or wheel as
if it were a leg. You can neither jump
nor negotiate obstacles that require
arms and legs working together (e.g., a
ladder or rope). You always leave a visible trail (giving others a Tracking
bonus: +1 for Wheeled, +2 for
Tracked). Tracks are also noisy (+2 to
all Hearing rolls to detect you), but let
you handle rough terrain more easily.
Tracked and Wheeled do not reduce
Move; in fact, you may buy up to three
levels of Enhanced Move (Ground).
This disadvantage usually accompanies the Machine meta-trait (p.
263).-20 points.

No Sense of Humor
Mental
-10 points

You never get any jokes; you think
everyone is earnestly serious at all
times. Likewise, you never joke, and
you are earnestly serious at all times.
Others react at -2 to you in any situation where this disadvantage becomes
evident.

No Sense of Smell/Taste
Physical
-5 points

This affliction – known as anosmia
– prevents you from smelling or tasting anything. Thus, you are unable to
detect certain hazards that ordinary
people spot quickly. However, the disability has its advantages . . . you need
never worry about skunks, and can
always eat what is set before you.

Nocturnal
Physical; Exotic
-20 points

You can only be active when the
sun is below the horizon. This represents more than a preference for night
over day! As soon as dawn starts to
break, you become lethargic – and
when the sun clears the horizon, you
fall paralyzed and comatose until the
sun goes down again.
Note that this is not the same as the
biological term “nocturnal.”

Special Enhancements
Permanent Paralysis: You turn to
stone or suffer some other permanent
incapacitation if struck by the sun’s
rays. Only one specific power or item
– most often a powerful magic spell –
can reverse this effect. Details are up
to the GM. +100%.

Noisy
Physical
-2 points/level

You make a lot of noise! Perhaps
you’re a ghost with clanking chains, a
cyborg with a rasping ventilator, or a
machine with a loud engine . . . or perhaps you’re absurdly inept at stealth.
You make noise constantly – even
when standing still – unless you are
comatose (for animate beings) or
powered down (for machines). Each
level gives +2 to Sense rolls to hear you
or -2 to your Stealth rolls, as the situation warrants. In some circumstances
(e.g., at the opera), each level might
also give -1 to reactions! You may not
take more than five levels of Noisy
without the GM’s permission.

Non-Iconographic
Mental
-10 points

You are incapable of processing
abstract images and symbols.
Graphical computer interfaces, maps,
heraldic devices, and magical runes
are completely meaningless to you.
Like Dyslexia (p. 134), this is a structural shortcoming of your brain; you
cannot normally buy it off.
You cannot learn Cartography,
Heraldry, Symbol Drawing, or any
similar skill used mainly to design or
arrange patterns and symbols. You
also cannot use graphical computer
interfaces; you are limited to text
interfaces and immersive virtual realities. Finally, since you cannot grasp
magical symbols, you cannot learn
magic save through oral tradition.
Note that you can process text
without difficulty, and may learn written languages normally (see Language,
p.
23).

Numb
Physical
-20 points

You have no sense of touch. You
have a limited degree of pressure
sense – enough to feel your weight and
stand up and walk without falling over
– but you cannot distinguish textures
by touch at all. Feats that depend on
touch alone (e.g., touch-typing, or
untying your hands behind your back)
are impossible for you.
When performing a task that
requires hand-eye coordination, you
suffer all the effects of one level of
Ham-Fisted (p. 138) unless you take
twice as long to perform the action
and can clearly see what you’re doing.
If you also have Ham-Fisted, add its
effects.
You experience pain, temperature,
and shock as acutely as anyone else,
unless you also have High Pain
Threshold (p. 59), but you won’t know
where you were injured without looking. Instead, you feel pain as generalized shock throughout your entire
body. As a result, you cannot perform
First Aid on yourself if you can’t see
the injury.

Oblivious
Mental
-5 points

You understand others’ emotions
but not their motivations. This makes
you awkward in situations involving
social manipulation. You are the classic “nerd”! You have -1 to use or resist
Influence skills (see Influence Rolls,
p. 359): Diplomacy, Fast-Talk,
Intimidation, Savoir-Faire, Sex
Appeal, and Streetwise.

Obsession
Mental
-5 or -10 points

Your entire life revolves around a
single goal. Unlike Compulsive
Behavior (p. 128), this is not a daily
habit, but an overpowering fixation
that motivates all of your actions. And
unlike Fanaticism (p. 136), this does
not necessarily imply a set of philosophical beliefs.
You must rationalize all of your
actions as an attempt to reach your
goal. Make a self-control roll whenever it would be wise to deviate from
your goal. If you fail, you continue to
pursue your Obsession, regardless of
the consequences.
Point cost depends on the time
needed to realize your goal. A shortterm goal (e.g., assassinating someone) is worth -5 points, while a longterm goal (e.g., becoming President) is
worth -10 points. In both cases, modify the base cost to reflect your selfcontrol number. If your Obsession
causes others to react badly, take
Odious Personal Habit (p.
22) or
Delusion (p. 130) as well.
Should you ever reach your goal,
you must either substitute a new goal
or buy off your Obsession.

On the Edge
Mental
-15 points

You take grossly unreasonable risks
in the face of mortal danger. Make a
self-control roll whenever you face a
life-threatening situation: piloting a
burning vehicle, staring down an
entire street gang while armed only
with a toothbrush, etc. If you fail, you

may not back down from the
challenge – but you may roll again
after every success roll or reaction roll
relating to the situation. This might be
once per second in a potential combat
situation but only once per day on a
dangerous space mission.
In combat, make a self-control roll
every time you take your turn. If you
fail, you must make an All-Out attack
or engage in some other kind of nearinsane, suicidal behavior.
Most people think you’re crazy if
they witness this behavior, giving -2 on
reaction rolls. Individuals who value
bravery over self-preservation (GM’s
decision) will react at +2.

One Arm
Physical
-20 points

You have only one arm. You cannot
use two-handed weapons, wield two
weapons at once (or a weapon and a
shield), or perform any task that
requires two arms. You get -4 on tasks
that are possible with one arm but that
are usually executed with two (e.g.,
most Climbing and Wrestling rolls).
You have no penalty on tasks that
require only one arm. In all cases, the
GM’s ruling is final. When in doubt,
try a quick reality check if possible!
If you originally had two arms,
assume that you lost the left arm if
you were right-handed, or vice versa.
If you are a nonhuman who only
had one arm to begin with, your “arm”

need not be an arm at all – it can be
any appendage capable of fine manipulation. For instance, a parrot that
used its beak and tongue would have
One Arm (and not No Fine
Manipulators).
If you have advanced prosthetics
that cancel One Arm while worn,
apply a Mitigator limitation (p. 112).
Should you ever eliminate One Arm
completely through surgery or an
ultra-tech replacement limb, you must
pay back the points you received for it.

One Eye
Physical
-15 points

You have only one eye. Either you
are missing an eye (in which case you
may wear a glass eye or cover the
missing eye with a patch) or you have
only a single, cyclopean eye. You suffer -1 to DX in combat and on any task
involving hand-eye coordination, and-3 on ranged attacks (unless you Aim
first) and on rolls to operate any vehicle faster than a horse and buggy.
Some cultures regard those who
are missing an eye as unattractive. If
this is generally true in your game
world, losing an eye will also reduce
your appearance by one level (see
Physical Appearance, p.
21). If you
start with this trait, assume that it is
already factored into your appearance
– do not apply an additional reaction
modifier.

One Hand
Physical
-15 points

You have only one hand. For the
most part, use the rules under One
Arm (above). The difference is that
you may make unarmed parries with a
handless arm, and possibly strap
something to it (e.g., a shield).
Good-quality prosthetic replacements use the rules under One Arm.
Not all prosthetics are good enough to
count as Mitigators, though. A lowtech mechanical replacement gives
you -2 (for a grabber) or -4 (for a hook
or claw) on tasks involving that hand.
A hook or claw also counts as an
undroppable large knife in combat
(use Knife skill), and gives +1 to
Intimidation skill if waved at your
foes. In some societies, such crude
replacements will reduce appearance
as described under One Eye (above).

Overconfidence
Mental
-5 points

You believe that you are far more
powerful, intelligent, or competent
than you really are. You may be proud
and boastful or just quietly determined, but you must roleplay this
trait.
You must make a self-control roll
any time the GM feels you show an
unreasonable degree of caution. If you
fail, you must go ahead as though you
were able to handle the situation!
Caution is not an option.
You receive +2 on all reaction rolls
from young or naive individuals (who
believe you are as good as you say
you are), but -2 on reactions from
experienced NPCs.
Overconfidence is like Megalomania (p. 144) on a smaller scale.
Robin Hood was overconfident – he
challenged strangers to quarterstaff
duels. Hitler was a megalomaniac –
he invaded Russia! Heroes are
rarely megalomaniacal but often
overconfident.


Pacifism
Mental
Variable

You are opposed to violence. This
can take several forms. Choose one of
the following:
Reluctant Killer: You are psychologically unprepared to kill people.
Whenever you make a deadly attack
(e.g., with a knife or a gun) against an
obvious person whose face is visible to
you, you are at -4 to hit and may not
Aim. If you cannot see the foe’s face
(due to a mask, darkness, or distance,
or because you attacked from behind),
the penalty is only -2, save in close
combat. You have no penalty to attack
a vehicle (even an occupied one), an
opponent you do not believe is a person (including things with Horrific or
Monstrous appearance), or a target
you can’t actually see (e.g., a set of
map coordinates or a blip on a radar
screen). If you kill a recognizable person, the effect on you is the same as
for Cannot Kill (see below). You have
no problem with your allies killing;
you may even supply ammo, loaded
weapons, and encouragement! You
just can’t do the killing yourself. -5
points.
Cannot Harm Innocents: You may
fight – you may even start fights – but
you may only use deadly force on a foe
that is attempting to do you serious
harm. Capture is not “serious harm”
unless you are already under penalty
of death or have a Code of Honor that
would require suicide if captured. You
never intentionally do anything that
causes, or even threatens to cause,
injury to the uninvolved – particularly
if they are “ordinary folks.” This trait
is especially appropriate for crimefighters, supers, etc. -10 points.
Cannot Kill: You may fight – you
may even start fights – but you may
never do anything that seems likely to
kill another. This includes abandoning
a wounded foe to die “on his own”!
You must do your best to keep your
companions from killing, too. If you
do kill someone (or feel responsible
for a death), you immediately suffer a
nervous breakdown. Roll
2d and be
totally morose and useless (roleplay
it!) for that many days. During this
time, you must make a Will roll to
offer any sort of violence toward anyone, for any reason. -15 points.
Self-Defense Only: You only fight to
defend yourself or those in your care,
using only as much force as necessary
(no pre-emptive strikes allowed!). You
must do your best to discourage others from starting fights. -15 points.
Total Nonviolence: You will not lift
a hand against another intelligent
creature, for any reason. You must do
your nonviolent best to discourage
violent behavior in others, too. You
are free to defend yourself against
attacks by animals, mosquitoes, etc.-30 points.
In a high-realism campaign, the
GM might require all PCs to start out
with Reluctant Killer or even Cannot
Kill, giving them extra points but
putting them at a disadvantage when
facing hardened foes.

Paranoia
Mental
-10 points

You are out of touch with reality,
and think that everyone is plotting
against you. You never trust anyone
except old friends . . . and you keep an
eye on them, too, just in case. Most
people, understandably, react to you at
-2. A paranoid NPC reacts at -4 toward
any stranger, and any “legitimate”
reaction penalty (e.g., for an unfriendly race or nationality) is doubled.
Paranoia goes very well with
Delusions (p. 130), which of course
have their own disadvantage value!

Phantom Voices
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You are plagued by whispered
phrases that only you can hear. These
voices might be unintelligible, or they
might repeat the same words over and
over. Eventually, your sanity (such as
it is) will start to erode.
In any situation that the GM feels
is stressful, he may roll
2d. On a 6 or
less, you hear voices. The GM will
always roll whenever you miss a
Fright Check or make the roll exactly,
and whenever you fail a self-control
roll for another stress-related disadvantage. The voices occur in addition
to any other results!
Point value depends on the nature
of the voices:
Annoying: You hear voices, but you
are reasonably sure that they are not
real, and they do not harm you directly. Still, most people who see you
responding to unheard noises will
react at -2. -5 points.
Disturbing: As above, but in addition, the voices can drown out normal
sounds, and may even startle and
frighten you (possibly requiring a
Fright Check). -10 points.
Diabolical: The voices tell you to
kill – yourself or others – or perform
other terrible deeds. If you are already
under stress, or under the influence of
drugs, you might need to make a Will
roll to avoid carrying out the “orders”
(GM’s discretion). -15 points.
Phantom Voices are usually due to
mental problems, but they may also be
symptomatic of some form of supernatural possession. If so, psychotherapy cannot reveal the cause, much less
cure the problem. If you manage to
exorcise the evil spirits, you are cured
and must buy off this disadvantage.

Phobias
Mental
Variable

You are afraid of a specific item,
creature, or circumstance. Many fears
are reasonable, but a Phobia is an
unreasonable, unreasoning, morbid
fear. The point value depends on how
common the object of your fear is –
fear of darkness is far more troublesome than fear of left-handed
plumbers.
Make a self-control roll whenever
you are exposed to the object of your
Phobia. If you fail, roll
2d, add the
amount by which you failed your selfcontrol roll, and look up the result on
the Fright Check Table (p.
260). For
instance, if your self-control number
is 9 but you rolled a 13, roll
2d+4 on
the table. The result from the table
affects you immediately!
If you succeed, you have successfully mastered your Phobia (for now),
but you are still shaken, and have a
penalty to all DX, IQ, and skill rolls
while the cause of your fear persists.
The penalty depends on your self-control number.

Self-Control Number   Penalty
6                     -4
9                     -3
12                    -2
15                    -1

You must roll again every 10 minutes to see if the fear overcomes you.
Even the mere threat of the feared
object requires a self-control roll,
although this is at +4. If your enemies
actually inflict the feared object on
you, you must make an unmodified
self-control roll, as described above. If
you fail, you might break down,
depending on the Fright Check
results, but you won’t necessarily talk.
Some people can panic and fall apart,
but still refuse to talk – just as some
people do not talk under torture.
A phobic situation is by definition
stressful. If you have other mental disadvantages that are triggered by
stress, you are likely to have these
reactions if you fail to resist a Phobia.
Some common phobias:
Being Alone (Autophobia): You cannot stand to be alone, and do anything
in your power to avoid it. -15 points.*
Blood (Hemophobia): The sight of
blood gives you the screaming willies!
You need to make a self-control roll
during most combats . . . -10 points.*
Cats (Ailurophobia): -5 points.*
Crowds (Demophobia): Any group
of over a dozen people sets off this fear
unless they are all well known to you.
The self-control roll is at -1 for over 25
people, -2 for a crowd of 100 or more,-3 for 1,000, -4 for 10,000, and so on.-15 points.*
Darkness (Scotophobia): A common
fear, but crippling. You should avoid


being underground if possible; if something happens to your flashlight or
torch, you might well lose your mind
before you can relight it. -15 points.*
Death and the Dead (Necrophobia):
You are terrified by the idea of death.
Make a self-control roll in the presence of any dead body (animals don’t
count, but portions of human bodies
do). Roll at -4 if the body is that of
someone you know, or -6 if the body is
unnaturally animated in some way. A
ghost (or apparent ghost) also requires
a roll at -6. -10 points.*
Dirt (Mysophobia): You are deathly
afraid of infection, or just of dirt and
filth. Make a self-control roll when
you must do something that might get
you dirty. Roll at -5 to eat any unaccustomed food. You should act as
“finicky” as possible. -10 points.*
Dogs (Cynophobia): This includes
all canines: foxes, wolves, coyotes,
wild dogs, etc. -5 points.*
Enclosed Spaces (Claustrophobia):
A common, crippling fear. You are
uncomfortable any time you can’t see
the sky – or at least a very high ceiling.
In a small room or vehicle, you feel the
walls closing in on you . . . You need
air! This is a dangerous fear for someone who plans to go underground. -15
points.*

Fire (Pyrophobia): Even a burning
cigarette bothers you if it comes within five yards. -5 points.*
Heights (Acrophobia): You may not
voluntarily go more than 15 feet above
ground, unless you are inside a building and away from windows. If there
is some chance of an actual fall, selfcontrol rolls are at -5. -10 points.*
Insects (Entomophobia): You are
afraid of all “bugs.” Large or poisonous ones give -3 to self-control rolls.
Very large ones, or large numbers, give-6. Avoid hills of giant ants. -10
points.*
Loud Noises (Brontophobia): You
avoid any situation where loud noises
are likely. A sudden loud noise
requires an immediate self-control
roll. A thunderstorm is a traumatic
experience for you! -10 points.*
Machinery (Technophobia): You
can never learn to repair any sort of
machine and refuse to learn to use
anything more complicated than a
crossbow or bicycle. Any highly technological environment calls for a selfcontrol roll; dealings with robots or
computers require a roll at -3, and
hostility from intelligent machines
requires a roll at -6. -5 points at TL4 or
below, -15 points at TL5 or above.*
Magic (Manaphobia): You can
never learn to use magic, and you
react badly to any user of magic. Make
a self-control roll whenever you are in
the presence of magic. This roll is at -3
if you are to be the target of friendly
magic, and -6 if you are the target of
hostile magic. (The magic does not
have to be real, if you believe in it!) -15
points in a setting where magic is common, -10 if it is known but uncommon,-5 if “real” magic is essentially
unknown.*
Monsters (Teratophobia): Any
“unnatural” creature sets off this fear.
You have -1 to -4 on the self-control
roll if the monster seems very large or
dangerous, or if there are a lot of
them. Note that the definition of
“monster” depends on experience. An
American Indian would consider an
elephant monstrous, while an African
pygmy would not! -15 points.*
Number 13 (Triskaidekaphobia):
You must make a self-control roll
whenever you have to deal with the
number 13 – visit the 13th floor, buy
something for $13.00, etc. Roll at -5 if
Friday the 13th is involved! -5 points.*

Oceans (Thalassophobia): You are
afraid of any large body of water.
Ocean travel, or even air travel over
the ocean, is basically impossible for
you, and encounters with aquatic
monsters are also upsetting. -10
points.*
Open Spaces (Agoraphobia): You
are uncomfortable whenever you are
outside, and actually become frightened when there are no walls within
50 feet. -10 points.*
Psionic Powers (Psionophobia):
You are afraid of those with known
psionic powers. An actual exhibition
of power in your presence requires a
self-control roll. You do not voluntarily allow anyone to use a psionic power
on you. The power does not have to be
real – all that matters is that you
believe it is! -15 points if psi powers are
common, -10 if they are uncommon, -5
if they are essentially unknown.*
Reptiles (Herpetophobia): You
come unglued at the thought of reptiles, amphibians, and similar scaly
slimies. A very large reptile, or a poisonous one, gives -2 to self-control
rolls; a horde of reptiles (such as a
snake pit) gives -4. -10 points.*
Sex (Coitophobia): You are terrified
by the idea of sexual relations or the
loss of your virginity. -10 points
Sharp Things (Aichmophobia): You
are afraid of anything pointed.
Swords, spears, knives, and hypodermic needles all give you fits. Trying to
use a sharp weapon, or being threatened with one, requires a self-control
roll at -2. -15 points at TL5 or below,-10 at TL6 or above.*
Spiders (Arachnophobia): -5
points.*
Strange and Unknown Things
(Xenophobia): You are upset by any
sort of strange circumstances, and in
particular by strange people. Make a
self-control roll when surrounded by
people of another race or nationality;
roll at -3 if the people are not human.
If you lose control, you might well
attack strangers out of fear. -15
points.*
Sun (Heliophobia): -15 points.*
Weapons (Hoplophobia): The presence of any sort of weaponry is stressful. Trying to use a weapon, or being
threatened with one, requires a selfcontrol roll at -2. -20 points.*


Post-Combat Shakes
Mental
-5 points

You are shaken and sickened by
combat, but only after it’s over. Make a
self-control roll at the end of any battle. It is up to the GM to determine
when a battle has truly ended, and he
may apply a penalty if the combat was
particularly dangerous or gruesome. If
you fail, roll
2d, add the amount by
which you failed your self-control roll,
and look up the result on the Fright
Check Table (p.
260). For instance, if
your self-control number is 12 but you
rolled a 14, roll
2d+2 on the table. The
result from the table affects you
immediately!

Pyromania
Mental
-5 points

You like fires! You like to set fires,
too. For good roleplaying, you must
never miss a chance to set a fire, or to
appreciate one you encounter. Make a
self-control roll whenever you have an
opportunity to set a fire.

Quadriplegic
Physical
-80 points

You are paralyzed in all your arms
and legs, or lack limbs entirely. You
can neither manipulate objects nor
move yourself without assistance. You
suffer all the bad effects of Paraplegic
(see Lame, p. 141) and No
Manipulators
(see
No
Fine
Manipulators, p. 145). If the GM is
enforcing a disadvantage limit,
Quadriplegic counts against the limit
– but you may reduce ST and DX by
up to four levels each without the
resulting disadvantage points counting against the limit (points gained
from further reductions count normally).
For rules governing prosthetic
limbs and surgical cures, see Lame
(p. 141) and One Arm (p. 147) for legs
and arms, respectively.

Reprogrammable
Mental; Exotic
-10 points

You can be programmed to obey a
master. If you have Slave Mentality
(p. 154), you must obey slavishly, and
remain strictly within the letter of
your master’s commands. If you lack
Slave Mentality, you may interpret his
orders creatively, as long as you
remain within either their letter or
spirit (your choice). If you are nonsentient (IQ 0), you have no interest in
doing anything but following your
programming!
You may have both Duty and
Reprogrammable. If so, you must do
your best to fulfill both obligations.
Should the two come into conflict,
your programming always comes
first.
This trait is most appropriate for
golems, mindless undead, robots, and
similar automata. It is rarely suitable
for PCs, and the GM may choose to
forbid it entirely.

Restricted Vision
Physical
-15 or -30 points

You have an unusually narrow field
of vision. A normal character can see a
120° arc in front of him without turning his head, and has
20° of peripheral vision to either side, giving him a
180° “arc of vision” for observation
and ranged attacks. On a battle map,
this means he has three “front” hexes,
two “side” hexes (“left” and “right”),
and a single “back” hex. Your vision is
considerably more restricted. This
comes in two levels:

No Peripheral Vision: Your arc of
vision is a 120° wedge to the front. On
a map, your “left” and “right” hexes
become “back” hexes – that is, you
have three “back” hexes, and get no
defense against attacks originating
from these hexes! -15 points.
Tunnel Vision: Your arc of vision is
a 60° wedge to the front. On a map, your only “front” hex is the one
directly ahead of you. The hexes to
either side of this are “side” hexes: you
are at -2 to defend against attacks
from these hexes, and can only attack
into those hexes with a Wild Swing.
Everything else is a “back” hex, as
above. -30 points.



Restricted Diet
Physical
-10 to -40 points

You require a specialized food or
fuel that is hard to come by. Unlike
Dependency (p. 130), you do not take
damage if you go without . . . you just
can’t eat or refuel, which will eventually incapacitate you. Point value
depends on the rarity of the item you
consume:

Rare: Dragon’s blood, exotic nutrient mixture, weapons-grade uranium.-40 points.
Occasional: Virgin’s blood, rocket
fuel, babies, radioactives. -30 points.
Common: Human flesh, gasoline,
liquid hydrogen. -20 points.
Very Common: Fresh meat, any
hydrocarbon fuel (gasoline, diesel,
etc.), electric batteries, fresh blood.-10 points.
Restricted Diet is appropriate for
normal humans with chronic gastrointestinal disorders.

Special Limitations
Substitution: You can try to consume a food or fuel similar to the one
you require. For instance, a cyborg
that requires exotic nutrients could try
ordinary human food, or a machine
that requires gasoline could try diesel.
This sustains you, but you must make
a HT roll after each meal or refueling.
Failure means your HT attribute
drops by one until you receive appropriate medical or mechanical attention. Critical failure means an
incapacitating reaction (GM’s decision): severe immune response,
engine failure, etc. Those who lack
this limitation but for some reason
attempt substitution derive no sustenance at all and must still make the
HT roll above; treat success as failure
and failure as critical failure. -5





Revulsion
Physical; Supernatural
-5 to -15 points

You have an incapacitating supernatural reaction to an ordinarily
innocuous substance. If you touch or
breathe the substance, you must
immediately make a HT roll. On a
failure, you are at -5 to all skills and
attributes for the next 10 minutes. If
you ingest the substance, you are at -5
to attributes and -10 to all skills and
Sense rolls for 10 minutes. Point
value depends on the rarity of the substance:
Occasional (leather, soap): -5
points.
Common (smoke, wood): -10
points.
Very Common (grass, metal): -15
points.
This reaction is physical in nature.
For mental aversions, see Dread
(p. 132).


Sadism
Mental
-15 points

You delight in cruelty . . . mental,
physical, or both. Make a self-control
roll whenever you have an opportunity to indulge your desires and know
you shouldn’t (e.g., because the prisoner is one who should be released
unharmed). If you fail, you cannot
restrain yourself. Those who become
aware of your problem react at -3
unless they are from a culture that
holds life in little esteem.
This is a particularly “evil” trait,
more appropriate to villainous NPCs
than to heroic PCs. The GM may completely prohibit Sadism if he does not
want anyone roleplaying it in his campaign.
It is possible, though despicable, to
possess both Bully (p. 125) and Sadism.

Secret
Social
-5 to -30 points

A Secret is an aspect of your life or
your past that you must keep hidden.
Revelation would result in lasting negative consequences. The point value
depends on the severity of those consequences:
Serious Embarrassment: If this
information gets around, you can forget about ever getting a promotion,
getting elected, or marrying well.
Alternatively, revelation of your Secret
might simply attract unwelcome public attention. -5 points.
Utter Rejection: If your Secret is
revealed, it will change your whole
life. Perhaps you will lose your job and
be rejected by friends and loved ones.
Perhaps admirers, cultists, long-lost

relatives, or the press will harass you.-10 points.
Imprisonment or Exile: If the
authorities uncover your Secret, you’ll
have to flee, or be imprisoned for a
long time (GM’s discretion). -20
points.
Possible Death: Your Secret is so
terrible that you might be executed by
the authorities, lynched by a mob, or
assassinated (by the Mafia, CIA, etc.)
were it revealed. You would be a hunted man. -30 points.

Frequency of Appearance
In general, a Secret appears in a
particular game session if the GM rolls
a 6 or less on
2d before the adventure
begins. However, as for all other disadvantages of this type, the GM need
not feel constrained by the appearance roll. If he thinks that the Secret
should come into play, it does!
When a Secret appears in play, it is
not automatically made public. The
GM will give you a chance to prevent
your Secret from being revealed. This
might require you to cave in to blackmail or extortion, steal incriminating
documents, or even silence the person
who knows the Secret. Regardless of
the solution, however, it’s only temporary – the Secret will appear again and
again until either you buy it off with
earned character points or it is finally
revealed.

Effects of Revelation
If a Secret is made public, there is
an immediate negative effect ranging
from serious embarrassment to possible death, depending on the severity of
the Secret (see above). There is also a
lasting effect: you suddenly acquire
new, permanent disadvantages – or
lose advantages – worth points equal
to twice what the Secret was worth!
These new disadvantages replace the
Secret on your character sheet, and
reduce your point value accordingly.
The GM chooses the new disadvantages and lost advantages, which
should always be appropriate to the
Secret. Most Secrets turn into
Enemies
(p.
135),
negative
Reputations (p.
26), and Social
Stigmas (p. 155), or reduce or remove
advantages described under Wealth
and Influence (pp. 25-30). Some could
even turn into mental or physical disadvantages.


Example: A city guardsman has a -20-point Secret: at night, he is a thief.
When he is finally caught and brought
to justice, his Secret is revealed and
immediately replaced with -40 points
in disadvantages and lost advantages!
The GM rules that he is stripped of his
5-point Legal Enforcement Powers (-5
points), gains Social Stigma (Criminal
Record) (-5 points), and is punished
by having his right hand chopped off
(One Hand, -15 points) and being
forced to pay reparations that reduce
his Wealth from Average to Poor (-15
points).

Secret Identity
Social
Variable

A Secret Identity is a special kind
of Secret (above): it is another persona
that you use for deeds that you don’t
want connected with your “public”
self. Only your closest family and
friends know, and you are willing to go
to great lengths to keep your privacy.
This is a disadvantage because it limits your behavior. It is difficult (and
often illegal) to maintain a Secret
Identity.
The GM will roll to see whether
your Secret Identity factors into a
game session, just as for any Secret. If
it does, this usually takes the form of
someone who threatens to expose
your real identity. Anyone with Status
3 or higher gets an extra -10 points for
a Secret Identity, because of the attention the media and public pay to his
every move, but the GM will introduce
a challenge to his identity on a roll of
7 or less instead of the usual 6 or less.
A Secret Identity otherwise works
just like any other Secret, its point
value depending on the severity of the
consequences should it be exposed.

Self-Destruct
Physical; Exotic
-10 points

As soon as you reach your aging
threshold (age 50 for a normal
human), your organs and immune
system begin to fail. You start to age
rapidly, making aging rolls every day
at -3 to HT.
You cannot get points for both this
disadvantage and Terminally Ill
(p. 158). If you are going to selfdestruct soon, take Terminally Ill
instead of Self-Destruct.

Selfish
Mental
-5 points

You are self-important and statusconscious, and spend much of your
time striving for social dominance.
Make a self-control roll whenever you
experience a clear social slight or
“snub.” On a failure, you lash out at
the offending party just as if you had
Bad Temper (p. 124) – likely resulting
in a bad reaction (-3 to the target’s
reactions toward you) and putting you
in an awkward social situation.
Selfish NPCs react to perceived
slights at a penalty:

Self-Control Number  Penalty
6                    -5
9                    -4
12                   -3
15                   -2

Selfless
Mental
-5 points

You are altruistic and self-sacrificing, and put little importance on personal fame and wealth. You must
make a self-control roll to put your
needs – even survival – before those of
someone else. A Selfless race will have
a “hive mentality.”

Semi-Upright
Physical; Exotic
-5 points

You have a semi-upright posture,
like a chimpanzee. You can stand up
more-or-less comfortably, allowing
you to use your forelimbs to bash enemies, hold babies, or even manipulate
objects. You can manage a clumsy gait
while upright (-40% to Move), but you
must use all of your limbs to run at
full Move. If you have DX 12 or more,
you can carry a small object or two
while walking.


Sense of Duty
Mental
-2 to -20 points

You feel a strong sense of commitment toward a particular class of people. You will never betray them, abandon them when they’re in trouble, or
let them suffer or go hungry if you can
help. This is different from a Duty
(p. 133), which is imposed upon you.
A Sense of Duty always comes from
within.
If you are known to have a Sense of
Duty, the GM will adjust the reactions
of others by +2 when rolling to see
whether they trust you in a dangerous
situation. However, if you go against
your Sense of Duty by acting against
the interests of those you are supposed
to be looking out for, the GM will
penalize you for bad roleplaying.
The GM will assign a point value to
your Sense of Duty based on the size
of the group you feel compelled to aid:
Individual (the President, your
wingman, etc.): -2 points.
Small Group (e.g., your close
friends, adventuring companions, or
squad): -5 points.
Large Group (e.g., a nation or religion, or everyone you know personally): -10 points.
Entire Race (all humanity, all elves,
etc.): -15 points.
Every Living Being: -20 points.
You cannot claim points for a
Sense of Duty toward Allies,
Dependents, or Patrons. The point
costs of these traits already take such a
bond into account.
You can take a Sense of Duty
toward adventuring companions. If
you do, you must share equipment
with and render aid to the other members of your adventuring party, and go
along with majority decisions. The
GM might make this mandatory in
games where the party needs to get
along. This gives everyone a “free” 5
points to spend . . . but if you start
backstabbing, running off on your
own, etc., the GM is free to overrule
your actions and point to these bonus
points as the reason why.


Short Attention Span
Mental
-10 points

You find it difficult to concentrate
on a single task for longer than a few
minutes. Make a self-control roll
whenever you must maintain interest
in something for an extended period
of time, or whenever a distraction is
offered. If you fail, you automatically
fail at the task at hand. The GM might
give you a small bonus to the self-control roll in situations where concentration is crucial, such as when your
survival is at stake.


Short Lifespan
Physical; Exotic
-10 points/level

Your lifespan is
much shorter than the
human norm. Each
level of this disadvantage halves your lifespan (round
down). This affects the age at which
you reach maturity, the ages at which
aging rolls begin and increase in frequency, and the interval between
aging rolls; see the table (above right).
No more than four levels are possible.
Short Lifespan is often found in conjunction with Self-Destruct (p. 153).

Level       Maturity    Aging [Frequency of Aging Rolls]
0 (Human)   18 years    50 years [1 year]       70 years [6 months]
1           9 years     25 years [6 months]     35 years [3 months]
2           4 years     12 years [3 months]     17 years [45 days]
3           2 years     6 years [45 days]       8 years [22 days]
4           1 year      3 years [22 days]       4 years [11 days]

Shyness
Mental
-5, -10, or -20 points

You are uncomfortable around
strangers. Roleplay it! This disadvantage comes in three levels; you can buy
it off one level at a time.
Mild: You are uneasy with
strangers, especially assertive or
attractive ones. You have -1 on skills
that require you to deal with people,
including
Acting,
Carousing,
Diplomacy, Fast-Talk, Intimidation,
Leadership, Merchant, Panhandling,
Performance,
Politics,
Public
Speaking, Savoir-Faire, Sex Appeal,
Streetwise, and Teaching. -5 points.
Severe: You are very uncomfortable
around strangers, and tend to be quiet
even among friends. -2 the skills listed
above. -10 points.
Crippling: You avoid strangers
whenever possible. You may not learn
the skills listed above at all, and are at-4 on default rolls on such skills. -20
points.

Slave Mentality
Mental
-40 points

You have no initiative, and become
confused and ineffectual without a
“master” to give you orders. You must
make an IQ roll at -8 before you can
take any action that isn’t either obeying a direct order or part of an established routine. As well, you automatically fail any Will roll to assert yourself or resist social influence except in
circumstances where the GM rules
that success might be possible, in
which case you roll at -6.
This doesn’t necessarily imply low
IQ or Will. You might be intelligent
enough to obey the command,
“Program the computer to detect
quarks,” but if you were starving and
found $10, you would have to roll vs.
IQ-8 to decide to pick up the money
and go buy food without being told to
do so. Similarly, you might be strongwilled enough to make all your Fright
Checks in the presence of terrifying
monsters, yet roll at Will-6 to resist the
unsubtle manipulations of an obvious
con man.
This disadvantage is rarely appropriate for PCs, and the GM may
choose to forbid it entirely.

Sleepwalker
Mental
-5 points

You walk in your sleep (“somnambulate”). This is merely annoying or
embarrassing under most circumstances (unless you fall down the
stairs), but it can be very dangerous to
sleepwalk while encamped in
hostile territory!

If sleepwalking would matter during an adventure, the GM will make a
self-control roll for you whenever you
go to sleep. If you fail, you sleepwalk
sometime during the night. You wake
up after walking for 1d minutes, or if
someone awakens you. The GM will
make DX rolls to see if you trip while
going down stairs or walking over
rough ground – if this happens, you
wake up suddenly and are mentally
stunned.
You are considered to be in a hypnagogic state while sleepwalking, and
thus are very susceptible to telepathic
influences. If you possess supernatural abilities, you might use these while
sleepwalking (e.g., if you have Warp,
you might “sleepwarp” instead).

Sleepy
Physical; Exotic
Variable

This is a racial trait. Members of
the race need to sleep more than the
human norm of 1/3 of the time. Point
value depends on the fraction of the
time they must spend asleep:

Time Spent Asleep  Cost
1/2 of the time    -8
2/3 of the time    -16
3/4 of the time    -20
7/8 of the time    -26

The race’s precise schedule is a
“special effect.” For instance, a race
that sleeps
2/4 of the time might be
awake and active for three days
straight and then sleep for a full nine
days.

This trait can also represent hibernation. For instance, if a race is awake
and active on a human schedule for
six months, and then hibernates for
two months straight, then on the average, that’s equivalent to sleeping 1/2 of
the time.

Slow Eater
Physical; Exotic
-10 points

You spend a lot of your time eating.
Each meal takes about two hours, as
opposed to about 1/2 hour for most
humans. This reduces the time available for study, long tasks, and travel on
foot by
4 1/2 hours per day.

Slow Healing
Physical
-5 points/level

Your body heals very slowly. Each
level (maximum three levels) doubles
the interval between HT rolls to regain
lost HP: roll every two days for Slow
Healing 1, every four days for Slow
Healing
2, and every eight days for
Slow Healing
2. Take Unhealing
(p. 160) if you heal even more slowly.
Each level also doubles the time
allowed between Physician rolls
when under the care of a competent
physician (see Medical Care, p.
424).
Normal humans may take no more
than one level of Slow Healing.

Slow Riser
Physical
-5 points

You are not a “morning person.”
For one hour after you awaken from
any sleep longer than a one-hour nap,
you have -2 on all self-control rolls and-1 to IQ and IQ-based skills.
Furthermore, whenever the GM
assesses attribute penalties for missed
sleep, you suffer an extra -1.

Social Disease
Physical
-5 points

You have contracted a contagious,
antibiotic-resistant bacteria, retrovirus, or similar disease. This is only
transmitted by close, unprotected
physical contact. Those who know
about it react to you at -1 and automatically resist your seduction
attempts. The disease isn’t fatal – at
least not immediately – but may produce physical symptoms (left to the
imagination of the player or GM).

Social Stigma
Social
-5 to -20 points

You belong to a race, class, sex, or
other group that your society deems
inferior. To be worth points, this must
be obvious from your physical appearance (a visible brand, tattoo, or magical mark counts), dress, manner, or
speech; or easily learned by anyone
who cares to check up on you (only
valid in societies with free and easy
access to information); or the result of
public denouncement (e.g., by a powerful leader or media figure) that
ensures that everyone you meet knows
that you, personally, belong to the disdained group.
A Social Stigma gives you a reaction penalty (-1 per -5 points of Social
Stigma), restricts your social mobility,
or both. Examples include:
Criminal Record: You have been
convicted of a crime that your society
considers serious. You may be prohibited from legally acquiring certain
items (e.g., weapons), taking certain
kinds of employment, receiving security clearances, or even traveling outside your country. Many noncriminals
who learn of your past react at -1;
police, judges, vigilantes, and other
law-and-order types usually react at-2. If you are also wanted, take an
appropriate Enemy. -5 points.
Disowned: Your family has publicly
snubbed you. This is only worth
points in settings where family ties
play a significant social role, and
never applies to those who voluntarily
part ways with their family. This
Social Stigma comes in two levels:
• You would normally be an heir in
your culture, but someone else has
been named in your stead. This is
embarrassing, but you may still count
yourself as part of the family. This
gives -1 on reaction rolls. -5 points.
• The head of your family – or your
entire clan – has wholly and publicly
disowned you. This gives -2 on reaction rolls. -10 points.
Excommunicated: Your church has
cast you out. Followers of your faith
react to you at -3. This is only a disadvantage if you are excommunicated by
a powerful and widespread religion
(most likely state-backed) that plays a
significant role in day-to-day life. -5
points.
If your religion has true supernatural power, and you are surrounded by
an aura that conveys your shame to
co-religionists, angels, and anyone
else who would care, no matter how
well you disguise yourself, your Social
Stigma is worth twice as much. -10
points.


Ignorant: You have not learned a
skill required of all responsible adults
in your society (that is, you have no
points in the skill). Others look down
upon you as a slacker or a fool. This
gives -1 on reactions for each “expected” skill you lack, up to a maximum of
four skills. This is only worth points in
highly structured societies, or in primitive ones where individuals depend
on one another for survival. -5
points/skill.
Minor: You are underage by your
culture’s standards. You suffer -2 on
reaction rolls whenever you try to deal
with others as an adult; they might
like you, but they do not fully respect
you. You might also be barred from
nightclubs, vehicle operation, war parties, guild membership, etc., depending on the culture and setting. You
must buy off this trait when you reach
“legal age” (usually 18) for your time
and place. -5 points.
Minority Group: You are a member
of a minority that the dominant culture around you regards as “barbarians” or “inferior.” You get -2 on all
reaction rolls made by anyone except
your own kind. In an area, profession,
or situation where your minority is
especially rare, you get +2 on reaction
rolls made by your own kind. -10
points.
Monster: You are a large carnivore,
magical abomination, or other being
that is hated or feared regardless of
actual appearance or disposition. This
gives you -3 on all reaction rolls, and
you are liable to be hunted on sight.
However, you get +3 to Intimidation
rolls in situations where you have the
upper hand (GM’s opinion). Examples:
a bear or a vampire. -15 points.
Second-Class Citizen: You belong to
a group that receives fewer rights and
privileges than “full citizens.” This
gives -1 on all reaction rolls except
from others of your own kind.
Examples: a woman in 19th-century
America, or members of some religions. -5 points.
Subjugated: You are a member of a
slave nation or race. Within the overlords’ culture, you have no rights, and
suffer the negative effects of SecondClass Citizen and Valuable Property. If
you manage to escape to freedom, you
acquire the entire overlord nation or
race as an Enemy. -20 points.

Uneducated: You are from a class,
race, or subculture that lacks a cultural repository of wisdom, eschews formal schooling, and takes a dim view of
activities that do not relate directly to
survival or procreation. You receive -1
to reactions from more sophisticated
folk in any situation where your lack
of schooling would be apparent, and
you may not start with any “booklearned” skills (GM’s discretion; most
IQ/Hard skills qualify). You may buy
off this trait once you have lived in
“civilized” parts for long enough (GM’s
decision). -5 points.
Valuable Property: Your society
regards you as somebody’s property
rather than as a “legal person.” This
takes the form of limited freedom or
lack of intellectual respect more than
as a reaction modifier. Examples: a
woman in 18th-century America or
16th-century Japan. -10 points.
Social Stigmas must bind those
who take them. For example, a
medieval Japanese lady must pay for
her 10-point bonus by giving up her
freedom of movement in many cases,
and must defer to older male relatives
when they are present. A black slave in
19th-century America is allowed to
learn very little and own almost no
property, and has little freedom of any
kind unless he manages to escape. (If
he does escape, he has traded his
Social Stigma for a powerful Enemy!)
It is possible to have multiple
Social Stigmas, provided they do not
significantly overlap (GM’s decision).
For instance, a teenager who drops
out of school and joins a street gang
could believably end up with Minor,
Uneducated, and Criminal Record.

Space Sickness
Physical
-10 points

You are miserable in free fall. You
can never learn Free Fall skill; you
must always roll at default. In addition, you are at -4 on your HT roll to
avoid “space adaptation syndrome”
(see p.
434) – and if you fail the first
HT roll, the only way for you to recover is to return to normal gravity.
This trait is only allowed in
campaigns that feature regular space
travel.

Split Personality
Mental
-15 points

You have two or more distinct personalities, each with its own set of
behavior patterns. They may interpret
their memories differently, and even
use different names.
For each personality, select a
“package” of mental disadvantages
and up to five quirks. The GM may
also permit variations in IQ,
Perception, Will, and mental advantages, where these would make sense.
Each package of mental traits must be
worth the same number of points.
When calculating the value of your
character, count the “package price”
once – not once for each personality.
All your personalities have the same
physical traits and skills (although
some personalities might not use certain skills), and share any mental
trait that is not part of one of these
packages.

Example: Bob Smith has three personalities. “Col. Smith” is a stern disciplinarian with Delusion (“I am a military officer”) [-10], Code of Honor
(Soldier’s) [-10], and the quirk “Stands
on ceremony” [-1]. “Bobby” is a party
animal with -2 to Will [-10],
Compulsive Carousing (6) [-10], and
the quirk “Sleeps all day and goes out
at night” [-1]. “Smitty” is a troublemaker with Overconfidence (12) [-5],
Trickster [-15], and the quirk “Steals
for fun” [-1]. All three personalities
share all of Bob’s other traits. Each
package totals -21 points. Bob’s player
claims the -21 points once. With -15
points for Split Personality (12), the
total point value is -36 points.
You must make a self-control roll
in any stressful situation (but no more
than once per hour of game time). On
a failure, one of your other personalities emerges, and you behave according to its mental disadvantages and
quirks. If there are several possibilities, the GM should either choose a
personality appropriate to the situation or roll randomly.
All your personalities are somewhat shallow and affected, which
gives -1 to reactions at all times. Those
who witness a personality change will
feel (possibly with justification) that
you are a dangerous nutcase, and
react at -3.



Squeamish
Mental
-10 points

You dislike “yucky stuff”: little bugs
and crawly things, blood and dead
bodies, slime, etc. When exposed to
such things, you react just as if you
had a Phobia; see Phobias, p. 148.
Note that you do not suffer from the
standard fears of insects, reptiles, dirt,
and the dead! What bothers you isn’t
huge bugs or reptiles, ordinary “clean”
dirt, and ghosts; it’s nasty creepy
things, filth, and bits of grue.
-15 points


Stress Atavism
Mental; Exotic
Variable

This disadvantage is normally
available only to characters who are
members of races “uplifted” from an
animal state.
You temporarily “regress” when
frightened, angered, fatigued, or
injured. Make a self-control roll in
those situations. On a failure, you
behave like an animal, acting on
impulse and instinct.
Once the stressful situation has
passed, make a self-control roll every
minute. If friends comfort you, roll at
+2. If one of these people has Animal
Empathy or Empathy, apply an additional +2. On a success, the attack
ends and you return to normal. If you
pass out from fatigue or injury before
you succeed, you recover automatically when you wake up.
Point value depends on the severity
of the attacks:
Mild: You have trouble speaking,
and must roll vs. IQ to utter a sentence. You cannot operate complicated machinery, although you may
attack wildly with weapons (-4 to hit).-10 points.*
Moderate: You suffer from all of the
above problems, and have trouble
understanding commands from others as well: roll vs. IQ to understand a
sentence spoken by someone else. If
you are attacked or challenged, you
must make a self-control roll to avoid
acting “on instinct.” -15 points.*

Severe: You cannot speak or understand others, or use tools (except possibly as clubs), and automatically act
on instinct at all times. You behave
like your primitive ancestors! -20
points.*

Stress Atavism may result in additional troublesome behavior. Pick a
suitable mental disadvantage, halve its
value (drop all fractions), and add this
point cost to the above costs before
applying the self-control multiplier.

Stubbornness
Mental
-5 points

You always want your own way.
Make yourself generally hard to get
along with – roleplay it! Your friends
may have to make a lot of Fast-Talk
rolls to get you to go along with perfectly reasonable plans. Others react
to you at -1.

Stuttering
Physical
-10 points

You suffer from a stammer or
other speech impediment. This gives-2 on any reaction roll where conversation is required, and -2 to
Diplomacy, Fast-Talk, Performance,
Public Speaking, Sex Appeal, and
Singing. Certain occupations (interpreter, newsreader, etc.) are always
closed to you.

Supernatural Features
Physical; Supernatural
Variable

You have disturbing features that
mark you as a demon, vampire, or
other supernatural being. You can
pass for a normal mortal to casual
observers, but closer inspection
reveals that you are not quite right.
This might give away your secret to
the trained eye.
Supernatural Features differ from
Unnatural Features (p.
22) in that they
aren’t usually obvious; they only
become apparent under a specific set
of circumstances. When they are
noticed, though, they result in a reaction penalty. They also give those who
know what to look for a bonus to any
skill roll (against Hidden Lore,
Occultism, etc.) made to identify your
true nature.
Supernatural Features can accompany appearance levels Hideous
through Transcendent (see Physical Appearance, p.
21). You cannot get
points for Supernatural Features if
you are Monstrous or Horrific, however. If you look that scary, you’re not
hiding any secrets!


No Body Heat: You are cold to the
touch. -1 on reaction rolls made by
those who touch you, shake your
hand, kiss you, etc.; +1 on all rolls to
deduce your secret. -5 points (-1 point
if you can gain warmth temporarily;
e.g., after feeding, for a vampire).
No Reflection: You produce no
reflection. You do not show up in mirrors, still water, and similar reflective
surfaces, and technological devices
such as cameras do not display your
image. In some places and times,
people will assume that you have no soul! -2 on reaction rolls made by
those who notice; +2 on all rolls to
deduce your secret. -10 points.

No Shadow: You produce no shadow, regardless of the intensity or direction of the light source. -2 on reaction
rolls made by those who notice; +2 on
all rolls to deduce your secret. -10
points.
Pallor: You look like a corpse, with
bloodless skin, sunken eyes, etc. -2 on
reaction rolls made by anyone who
can see you without makeup in good
light; +2 on all rolls to deduce your
secret. -10 points (-5 points if you can
gain the flush of life temporarily; e.g.,
after feeding, for a vampire).


Supersensitive
Mental; Supernatural
-15 points

You are telepathically sensitive to
the presence of others all the time. You
experience a constant, irritating buzz
of low-level psychic noise. This does
not imply any kind of useful telepathic ability – the thoughts and emotions
you receive remain just below the
threshold of conscious understanding.
If there are any sapient beings (IQ
6+) with
20 yards, you suffer -1 to DX
and IQ. This becomes -2 for 10 or more
people, -3 for 100 or more, -4 for 1,000
or more, and so on. If DX or IQ drops
below half its original score because of
this penalty, you collapse and can take
no action until the “noise” goes away.
Machine intelligences and individuals
behind telepathic shielding (psionic,
technological, or otherwise) do not
bother you.
There is one beneficial side effect
to Supersensitive: the psychic noise
you receive warns you if there are people within
20 yards, and the noise level
tells you roughly how many. The noise
is too diffuse to let you determine their
locations, however.

Point cost depends on the item’s
rarity in the environment:

Very Common (e.g., Disease,
Poison): -4 points/-1 to HT rolls.
Common (e.g., Bacteria, Gases): -2
points/-1 to HT rolls.
Occasional (e.g., Intestinal Disease,
Ingested Poison): -1 point/-1 to HT
rolls.


Susceptible
Physical
Variable

You are extremely sensitive to a
particular class of noxious items or
substances; e.g., disease or poison.
You have a penalty to all HT rolls to
resist the negative effects of these
things. You do not suffer extra damage, however; for that, see
Vulnerability (p. 161).
If you are exposed to trace quantities of an item to which you are
Susceptible – a dose so tiny that it
would not affect most people – you
must roll against HT+1, modified by
your usual penalty for this disadvantage. If you fail, you suffer half the
effects (fatigue, injury, attribute loss,
period of incapacitation, etc.) you
would suffer from a full dose. For
instance, Susceptible to Poison would
require a roll if you ingested highly
diluted industrial waste in drinking
water, while Susceptible to Disease
would require a roll if you received a
“live” vaccine (one that contains weakened microbes). Should there be any
doubt as to exposure or effects, the
GM’s decision is final.

You may not take more than five
levels of Susceptible to a given item, or
more than two separate Susceptible
disadvantages, without the GM’s permission. You cannot take more levels
of Susceptible than would reduce your
effective HT to
2. For instance, if your
HT is 7, you are limited to four levels
of Susceptible. If you have any form of

More than two years is worth nothing. Anyone might be hit by a truck in
that time!
If you acquire a “miracle cure,”
upload yourself into a new body, or
otherwise extend your life past your
termination date during the course of
the campaign, you must buy off this
disadvantage. If you cannot afford to
do so, the GM is free to make up the
difference with new disadvantages
related to your illness or its cure (e.g.,
Chronic Pain, Dependency, Maintenance, or Susceptible).
If the GM is running a one-shot
adventure or short campaign, he
should disallow this disadvantage as
meaningless.

Resistant (p. 80) that protects against
a given item, you cannot also be
Susceptible to that item.
This trait can simulate many common health problems. Use Susceptible
to Disease for a weak immune system,
Susceptible to Ingested Poison for a
tendency not to vomit up noxious substances (a “weak vomit reflex”), etc.

Terminally Ill
Physical
-50, -75, or -100 points

You are going to die . . . soon. This
could be due to a nasty disease, a
potent curse, an irremovable explosive
device embedded in the base of your
skull, or something else that will result
in certain death. Point cost depends
on how much time you have left:
Time Until Death    Cost
Up to one month     -100
Up to one year      -75
Up to two years     -50


Timesickness
Physical
-10 points

Time travel, dimension travel, and
teleportation make you ill. You cannot
have psionic talents, magic spells, or
technological skills that have to do
with this kind of travel, nor can you
learn the Body Sense skill. You must
make a HT roll whenever you journey
through time or across dimensions,
and whenever you teleport. On a failure, you are effectively stunned for 1d
hours (doubled on a critical failure!).
On a success, you are only stunned for
1dx10 minutes.
Timesickness is only allowed if
dimension travel, teleportation, or
time travel occur regularly in the
campaign. The GM may wish to permit a variation on this trait in settings
with faster-than-light hyperdrives
(“Hypersickness”) or jump drives
(“Jump Sickness”).


Trademark
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You have a special symbol – something that you leave at the scene of
action, as a way of “signing your
work.” The classic fictional example is
the carved initial “Z” of Zorro.
Simple: Your Trademark takes very
little time to leave and cannot be used
to trace your identity, but you
absolutely must leave it. You cannot
leave the scene until you do, even if
your enemies are breaking down the
door. A typical example is something
left at the scene – a playing card, a
small stuffed animal, etc. – as long as
it can’t be traced and takes little time.-5 points.
Complex: As above, but leaving
your Trademark measurably increases
your chances of being caught – initial
carving, notes, traceable clues, etc.
Leaving this sort of Trademark takes a

minimum of
20 seconds. Anyone
searching the scene receives +2 to
Criminology and Forensics rolls to
trace or identify you. -10 points.
Elaborate: Your trademark is so
elaborate – dousing the captured
thugs with a certain cologne, painting
the entire crime scene pink, writing a
long poem to the police – that it virtually ensures your eventual capture.
The GM may give investigators clues
without a successful Criminology or
Forensics roll! -15 points.
You may have only one Trademark.
Multiple actions (e.g., binding your
victims with purple phone wire, painting a frog on the wall, and wrecking
every computer in the building) simply give you a higher level of
Trademark – they are not multiple
Trademarks.
Note also that a Trademark is an
action separate from capturing the
crooks, committing the crime, etc. It’s
the particular way that it is done.
Destroying files on a computer is not a
Trademark; trashing them by substituting a “7” for each “5” is.

Trickster
Mental
-15 points

You crave the excitement of outwitting dangerous foes. This is not ordinary practical joking. Playing simple
tricks on innocent or harmless folk is
no fun at all – it has to be perilous!
There may be no need for this at all (in
fact, there probably isn’t), but you
need the thrill of a battle of wits and
dexterity.
Make a self-control roll each day. If
you fail, you must try to trick a dangerous subject: a skilled warrior, a
dangerous monster, a whole group of
reasonably competent opponents, etc.
If you resist, you get a cumulative -1
per day to your self-control roll until
you finally fail a roll!

Truthfulness
Mental
-5 points

You hate to tell a lie – or you are
just very bad at it. Make a self-control
roll whenever you must keep silent
about an uncomfortable truth (lying
by omission). Roll at -5 if you actually
have to tell a falsehood! If you fail, you
blurt out the truth, or stumble so
much that your lie is obvious. You
have a permanent -5 to Fast Talk skill,
and your Acting skill is at -5 when
your purpose is to deceive.

Uncontrollable Appetite
Mental; Supernatural
-15 points

You consume something that you
must obtain from other sapient beings
through force or guile, and you have
difficulty controlling your appetites.
You must specify what it is you crave.
This could be blood, “life force,” sex,
or anything else the GM permits.
Whenever you have an opportunity
to indulge, you must make a self-control roll. Roll at -2 if someone deliberately tempts you, or if the item you
feed on is available in large quantities
within range of your senses. If feeding
would restore lost HP, this roll is at -1
per missing HP. If you fail, you must
feed. Make a second self-control roll to
stop feeding once you have had your
fill. If you fail, you go into frenzy and
overindulge, which could kill your
victim.

Unfit
Physical
-5 or -15 points

You have worse cardiovascular
health than your HT alone would indicate. This comes in two levels:
Unfit: You get -1 to all HT rolls to
remain conscious, avoid death, resist
disease or poison, etc. This does not
reduce your HT attribute or HT-based
skills! As well, you lose FP at twice the
normal rate. -5 points.
Very Unfit: As above, but the penalty to HT rolls is -2. In addition, you
recover FP at only half the normal rate.
You may not purchase any level of
Resistant (p. 80). -15 points.

In both cases, this disadvantage
applies only to FP lost to exertion,
heat, etc. It has no effect on FP “spent”
to power psi or magic spells.


Unique
Mental; Supernatural
-5 points

You exist only in one timeline. If a
time paradox occurs, you have no
memory of it. If it is particularly
severe, you are likely to vanish. In
most settings, you would be unaware
of this danger until it happened . . .
and then nobody would even remember you! Thus, this disadvantage is
usually inappropriate for PCs.

In an alternate-world campaign,
being Unique means that you do not
exist in any form in an alternate world,
even one very much like your own.
This deprives you of the chance to
befriend “yourself” when you visit such
a world. There is one benefit, though:
you are effectively Zeroed (p. 100) at
no point cost in any alternate world.
Unique is only a disadvantage in
campaigns in which paradoxes or
changes in history – erasing past
events or whole timelines – are possible. See Temporal Inertia (p. 93) for the
opposite of this trait.



Unhealing
Physical; Exotic
-20 or -30 points

You cannot heal naturally. You get
no daily HT roll to recover lost HP,
and you cannot recuperate from crippling injuries on your own. The First
Aid skill can stop your bleeding, but
neither it nor the Physician skill can
restore missing HP. Technologies that
accelerate natural healing (including
herbs, drugs, etc.) are useless. This
trait comes in two levels:
Partial: You can heal naturally if a
rare condition is met (e.g., when you
are immersed in blood or bathed in
lava). You can also heal yourself by
stealing HP from others using
Vampiric Bite (p. 96), magic, or psionics. -20 points.
Total: You can never heal naturally,
and you cannot steal HP from others.-30 points.


Depending on your nature, you
might be able to regain lost HP and
the use of crippled limbs unnaturally
through surgery, repairs (if you’re a
machine), or exotic means (healing
spells, alchemy, psionics, etc.).



Unluckiness
Mental
-10 points

You have rotten luck. Things go
wrong for you – and usually at the
worst possible time. Once per play session, the GM will arbitrarily and maliciously make something go wrong for
you. You miss a vital die roll, or the
enemy (against all odds) shows up at
the worst possible time. If the plot of
the adventure calls for something bad
to happen to someone, it’s you. The
GM may not kill you outright with
“bad luck,” but anything less than that is fine. (For lethally bad luck, see
Cursed, p. 129.)
If you wish, you may specify a
recurring
“theme”
for
your
Unluckiness – for instance, your
weapons tend to break, you’re always
5 minutes late, or objects have a nasty
habit of falling on your head. The GM
should do his best to make your
Unluckiness work this way. However,
this is a characterization tool and not
a hard-and-fast game mechanic. Bad
luck can always manifest in other
ways if the GM wants to keep you on
your toes!


Unusual Biochemistry
Physical; Exotic
-5 points

You can subsist on human food,
but your biochemistry is sufficiently
different from that of humans that
drugs intended for humans don’t work
or have unpredictable effects. Drugs
that are specific to your biochemistry
work normally, but cost 10 times as
much as usual.
When you receive a drug intended
for humans, roll 1d:
1-3 – Normal effect.
4-5 – Normal effect, plus an additional harmful effect of the GM’s
choosing: lose 1d FP (sickness and
nausea), suffer an amplified version of
the drug’s usual negative side effects,
etc.
6 – No effect at all.


Vow
Mental
-5 to -15 points

You have sworn an oath to do (or
not to do) something. Whatever the
oath, you take it seriously; if you didn’t,
it would not be a disadvantage. This
trait is especially appropriate for
knights, holy men, and fanatics.
The point value of a Vow should be
directly related to the inconvenience it
causes you. The GM is the final judge.
Some examples:

Minor Vow: Silence during daylight
hours; vegetarianism; chastity (yes, for
game purposes, this is minor). -5
points.
Major Vow: Use no edged weapons;
keep silence at all times; never sleep
indoors; own no more than your horse
can carry. -10 points.
Great Vow: Never refuse any
request for aid; always fight with the
wrong hand; hunt a given foe until you
destroy him; challenge every knight
you meet to combat. -15 points.
Note that if you could represent
your Vow using another disadvantage,
you only get points for one of the two
disadvantages (your choice). No one
may get points for Vow (Poverty) and
Wealth (Dead Broke), Vow (Never kill)
and Pacifism (Cannot Kill), etc.
Many Vows end after a specified
period of time. You must buy off such
a Vow when it ends. Vows for a period
of less than a year are frivolous! If you
want to end a Vow before its stated
time, the GM may exact a penalty; for
instance, in a medieval world, you
might have to undertake a quest by
way of penance.

Vulnerability
Physical; Exotic
Variable

You take extra damage from a particular attack form. Whenever this
type of attack hits you, the GM applies
a special wounding multiplier to damage that penetrates your DR. Regular
wounding multipliers (for cutting,
impaling, etc.) further multiply the
damage.
Example: A werewolf with
Vulnerability (Silver x4) is nicked with
a silver knife for 1 point of cutting
damage. The GM multiplies this by
4
for Vulnerability, giving
4 points of
damage, and then multiplies by 1.5 for
a cutting attack. The final injury is 6
HP.
Point value depends on the wounding multiplier and the rarity of the
attack:

Vulnerability Table

Rarity of Attack        Wounding Multiplier
                  x2            x3           x4
Rare              -10 points    -15 points   -20 points
Occasional        -20 points    -30 points   -40 points
Common            -30 points    -45 points   -60 points
Very Common       -40 points    -60 points   -80 points

Use the categories under Limited
Defenses (p.
46) to assess rarity. The
GM has the final say on the rarity of a
given attack form. You may not take
more than two types of Vulnerability
without GM permission.
You cannot have Vulnerability to
anything against which you have a
specific defense: Resistant, Damage
Resistance limited to work only
against that attack form, etc. You can
have both Vulnerability and
Supernatural Durability (p. 89), but
this reduces the utility of Supernatural
Durability.

Special Limitations
Fatigue Only: You are vulnerable to
an attack that drains FP instead of HP,
or to some form of mundane fatigue
loss (e.g., x2 FP from hot weather).-50%.

Weak Bite
Physical; Exotic
-2 points

Your jaw is not structured to make
full use of your strength while biting.
Calculate biting damage normally,
then apply an extra -2 per die. This
trait is common for large herbivores
(e.g., horses), uncommon for small
herbivores and omnivores, and very
rare for carnivores.


Weakness
Physical; Exotic
Variable

You suffer injury merely by being
in the presence of a particular substance or condition (which cannot be
a food item or something equally easy
to avoid). This injury comes off your
HP directly, regardless of your DR or
defensive advantages. The more
quickly you take damage, the more
points your Weakness is worth:

Frequency of Damage    Value
1d per minute          -20 points
1d per 5 minutes       -10 points
1d per 20 minutes      -5 points

Multiply the base value to reflect
the rarity of the damaging substance
or condition:

Rare (e.g., exotic radiation or
minerals): x1/2.
Occasional (e.g., microwave radiation, intense normal cold, airborne pollen): x1.
Common (e.g., smoke, nearby
magic, horses, loud noises): x2.
Very Common (e.g., sunlight, living
plants): x3.
Example: An anaerobic organism
takes 1d per minute from oxygen. The
base value of a Weakness that inflicts
1d per minute is -20 points. Since oxygen is “Very Common,” final cost is -60
points.
You may not take more than two
types of Weakness without GM
permission.

Special Limitations
Fatigue Only: Your Weakness
drains FP instead of HP. -50%.Variable: Your Weakness is sensitive to received intensity. You may
specify one relatively common class of
barriers that halves the rate at which
you take damage (e.g., heavy clothing
or sunscreen, for sunlight). On the
other hand, intense sources (GM’s
decision) double the rate at which you
suffer harm! -40%.


Weirdness Magnet
Mental; Supernatural
-15 points

Strange and bizarre things happen
to you with alarming frequency. You
are the one demons stop and chat
with. Magic items with disturbing
properties find their way to you. The
only talking dog on
21st-century Earth
comes to you with his problems.
Dimensional gates sealed for centuries
crack open just so that you can be
bathed in the energies released . . . or
perhaps the entities on the other side
invite you to tea.
Nothing lethal happens to you, at
least not immediately, and occasionally some weirdness is beneficial. But
most of the time it is terribly, terribly
inconvenient. People who understand
what a Weirdness Magnet is (and that
you are one) react to you at -2. The
exceptions are parapsychologists,
fringe cultists, unhinged conspiracy
theorists, and thrill-seekers, who
follow you around!

Workaholic
Mental
-5 points

You tend to drive yourself past
your limits, and find it hard to relax
and turn away from your work. You
always work at least half again as long
as a normal working day. This often
results in missed sleep (see Missed
Sleep, p.
426). Most people regard you
with respect at first (+1 to reaction
rolls), but you eventually suffer -1 or -2
to reactions – especially from friends
and loved ones who rarely get to spend
time with you.

Wounded
Physical
-5 points

You have an open wound that will
not completely heal, for whatever reason (botched surgery, backfired healing spell, etc.). You are not missing
any HP, but your wound serves as a
path for infection and toxins, and may
complicate new injuries.
A foe who knows about your
wound may deliberately target it, at -7
to hit. Such attacks have a wounding
multiplier of 1.5 (that is, you take 50%
more damage). Blood agents that
reach your wound affect you as if carried on a weapon that broke your skin.
You must carefully dress your wound
each day (requires a First Aid or
Physician roll) or get -3 to all HT rolls
to resist infection in a plague-ridden
area.
At the GM’s option, you may
acquire a wound like this in play due
to torture, scalping, etc. Certain
wounds have other effects; for
instance, scalping would cost you a
level of appearance.

Xenophilia
Mental
-10 points

You are instinctively fascinated
and attracted by strangers and aliens,
no matter how dangerous or
frightening they appear to be. Make a
self-control roll whenever you meet
someone (or something) like this. If
you fail, you assume that this person
is interested in interacting with you
socially. A xenophile finds himself
offering drinks to glaring foreign soldiers, making passes at cute vampires,
and shaking tentacles with Things Man Was Not Meant To Know while
his companions are pointing weapons
or running the other way . . .
As partial compensation, you get a
bonus to Fright Checks when meeting
strange creatures
Self-Control Number    Bonus
6                      +4
9                      +3
12                     +2
15                     +1

NPCs with this trait will react to
exotic PCs at a similar bonus.


Attentive
Mental
-1 point
You tend to stick to one task until it’s
done. You get a +1 bonus when working on lengthy tasks, but -3 to notice
any important interruption!


Broad-Minded
Mental
-1 point
A trivial form of Xenophilia (p. 162).
You get along well with other races and
species, and strange looks rarely bother
you.

Careful
Mental
-1 point
A quirk-level version of Cowardice
(p. 129). You are naturally cautious,
always on the lookout for danger. You
dedicate extra time and money to
preparations before venturing into a
dangerous situation.

Chauvinistic
Mental
-1 point
An extremely low level of Intolerance
(p. 140). You are always aware of differences in sex, skin color, etc. even if you
do not actually react poorly to others.
Thin-skinned individuals might occasionally react to you at -1 as a result.

Code of Honor
Mental
-1 point
You may take a minor Code of
Honor (p. 127) as a quirk. For instance,
you might insist on exhibiting “gentlemanly” behavior toward all females, or
spurning “chauvinistic” behavior from
all males.

Congenial
Mental
-1 point

This is a milder version of Chummy
(p. 126). You like company and you
work well with others. You always
choose group action over individual
action.


Incompetence
Mental
-1 point

You are inept at one specific skill.
You cannot learn that skill, and your
default is at an extra -4. You cannot be
incompetent in a single specialty of a
skill; if you are incompetent with
Guns, for instance, you are incompetent with all guns. The GM may disallow Incompetence if the skill would
be irrelevant to a given character, or is
unlikely to play a role in the campaign.

Delusions
Mental
-1 point

You may take a completely trivial
Delusion (p. 130) as a quirk. This does
not affect your everyday behavior, and
is unlikely to be noticed by casual
acquaintances, but you must believe it!
Examples: “The Earth is flat.” “The
Pentagon controls the Boy Scouts and
the health food stores.” “Socks cause
diseases of the feet.”

Dislikes
Mental
-1 point

You can have any of the Phobias on
p. 148 at the level of a mere “dislike.” If
you dislike something, you must avoid
it whenever possible, but it does not
actually harm you as a Phobia would.
Dislikes don’t have to be watered-down
Phobias. There is a whole world full of
things to dislike: carrots, cats, neckties,
violence, telephones, telephone
solicitors, income tax . . .

Distractible
Mental
-1 point

Quirk-level Short Attention Span
(p. 153). You are easily distracted, and
don’t do well on long-term projects.
You are at -1 when rolling to accomplish long tasks.

Likes
Mental
-1 point

If you like something, you will seek
it out whenever possible. Gadgets, kittens, shiny knives, ceramic owls, fine
art . . . whatever. This is not a compulsion – just a preference.

Minor Addiction
Mental
-1 point

You may take Addiction (p. 122) as
a quirk, if you are addicted to a drug
that causes psychological dependency
and works out to 0 points under the
Addiction rules.

Nosy
Mental
-1 point

A lesser version of Curious (p. 129).
You are always poking your nose into
corners and everyone else’s business
(which is likely to result in a small
reaction penalty once in a while).

Obsessions
Mental
-1 point

You may take an almost-rational
and not especially unusual Obsession
(p. 146) as a quirk, to reflect a minor goal. For instance, you hope to get just
enough money to buy a farm (or boat,
or spaceship, or castle) of your own.

Dreamer
Mental
-1 point

You have a -1 on any long task,
because you tend to spend time thinking of better ways to do it, rather than
working.


Personality Change
Mental
-1 point

This is quirk-level Split Personality
(p. 156). You suffer from a full-blown
mental disadvantage, but only in circumstances that are normally under
your control; e.g., Bully when you
drink too much, or Pyromania when
you cast your Create Fire spell.

Proud
Mental
-1 point

This is Selfish (p. 153) at quirk
level. Individual success, wealth, or
social standing concerns you greatly.
NPCs with this quirk react at -1 to
orders, insults, or social slights.

Responsive
Mental
-1 point

A mild case of Charitable (p. 125).
You are able to imagine the feelings
and motivations of others – and all
other things being equal, you are
inclined to help them.

Staid
Mental
-1 point

You may take this very low level of
Incurious (p. 140) as a quirk. You are
likely to ignore matters that don’t
immediately affect you.

Trademark
Mental
-1 point

A quirk-level Trademark (p. 159)
takes almost no time to leave, cannot
be used to trace your identity, and can
be overlooked when inconvenient.

Dull
Mental
-1 point

You are not quite Hidebound
(p. 138), but you tend to stick with
tried and true methods.

Habits or Expressions
Mental
-1 point

Saying “Jehoshaphat!” or “Bless
my collar-button” constantly. . . or carrying a silver piece that you flip into
the air . . . or never sitting with your
back to the door.

Humble
Mental
-1 point

A weak form of Selfless (p. 153).
You tend to put the concerns of others,
or of the group, before your own.

Imaginative
Mental
-1 point

You are a font of ideas, and are
more than willing to share them with
others! They may or may not be good
ideas, of course . . .


Uncongenial
Mental
-1 point

A lesser version of Loner (p. 142).
You prefer to be alone. You always
choose individual action over group
action.

Bowlegged
Mental
-1 point

You are bowlegged. This doesn’t
normally affect Move, but you have -1
to Jumping skill. This quirk may elicit
a -1 reaction from those who think it
looks funny.



Vow
Mental
-1 point
A trivial Vow (p. 160) – e.g., never
drink alcohol, treat all ladies with
courtesy, or pay 10% of your income
to your church – is a quirk.

Cannot Float
Physical
-1 point

You always sink in water. This is
most applicable to machines, but it
might also afflict fantasy races or
result from a curse.
You have a physical feature – e.g.,
“Brilliant blue hair” – that makes you
stand out in a crowd. This gives -1 to
your Disguise and Shadowing skills,
and +1 to others’ attempts to identify
or follow you. Some Distinctive
Features may stem from full-blown
disadvantages. For instance, an albino
(someone with no natural body pigment, resulting in pink eyes and pinkwhite hair and skin) would also have
Weakness (Sunlight). Compare
Supernatural Features (p. 157) and
Unnatural Features (p.
22).

Horrible Hangovers
Physical
-1 point

You suffer an additional -3 to any
penalties the GM assesses for excessive drinking the previous evening,
and add three hours to hangover
duration.

Alcohol Intolerance
Physical
-1 point

Alcohol “goes right to your head.”
You become intoxicated much more
quickly than normal. You get -2 on any
HT roll related to drinking.

Minor Addiction
Physical
-1 point

You may take Addiction (p. 122) as
a quirk, if you are addicted to a drug
that causes physiological dependency
and works out to 0 points under the
Addiction rules.

Acceleration Weakness
Physical
-1 point

You are susceptible to the bad
effects of extreme acceleration, and
get -3 to HT rolls to avoid them.


Minor Handicaps
Physical
-1 point

You may take most mundane physical disadvantages at quirk level; for
instance, you could use a watereddown version of Lame for a “bum
knee.” Difficulties rarely crop up, but
are genuinely inconvenient when they
do. If you have this kind of handicap,
the GM may give you -1 to attribute,
skill, or reaction rolls, as appropriate,
in situations where it would logically
interfere.

Nervous Stomach
Physical
-1 point

You have -3 to HT rolls to avoid illness (typically in the form of attribute
penalties or vomiting) brought on by
rich or spicy food, strong drink, etc.

Neutered or Sexless
Physical
-1 point

You are missing sex organs that
someone of your race, sex, and age
would normally possess – or perhaps
you are a genuinely sexless being that
only looks like someone of a particular
race and sex. This might qualify you
for reduced appearance, Social
Stigma, or Unnatural Features in
some settings. However, there are
minor benefits: you are immune to
seduction and will never accidentally
become a parent. This is more than
simple sterility (which is a feature
worth 0 points).
